<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>Hebrew Literature</title>
      <respStmt>
        <resp>Edited by</resp>
        <name reg="Wilson, Epiphanius">Epiphanius Wilson</name>
      </respStmt>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>March 20, 2009</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">28369</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="he"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2009-03-20">March 20, 2009</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Juliet Sutherland, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Hebrew Literature</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Comprising</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">Talmudic Treatises, Hebrew</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">Melodies, And The</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">Kabbalah Unveiled</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Edited And With A Special Introduction By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Epiphanius Wilson, A.M.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Revised Edition</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">New York</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">P. F. Collier &amp; Son</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Copyright 1901</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">By The Colonial Press</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>


<pb n='iii'/><anchor id='Pgiii'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Special Introduction</head>

<p>
Hebrew literature contains some of the most profound
and most influential productions of the human spirit.
It constitutes a potent factor in modern civilization,
and possesses merits which place it far above most other literatures
of the world. The common salutation of the Hebrew is
<q>Peace,</q> while that of the Greeks is <q>Grace,</q> and that of the
Romans, <q>Safety.</q> The Greek sought after grace, or intellectual
and bodily perfection, and the power of artistic accomplishment.
The Roman's ideal was strength and security of life and
property. The Hebrew sought after peace, peace in the heart, as
founded on a sense of Jehovah's good providence, and a moral
conformity in conduct to His revealed will. While the Greek
in art, literature, and even in morals, made beauty his standard,
the Roman stood for power, domination and law, and the Hebrew
for religion. The Hebrew, indeed, introduced into Europe
the first clear conception of religion, as implied in monotheism,
and a rigidly defined moral law, founded upon the will of
Jehovah. The basis of morals among the Latins was political,
among the Greeks æsthetic, and among the Hebrews it was the
revealed will of Jehovah.
</p>

<p>
While the most important remains of Hebrew literature are
comprised in the Scriptures known to us as the Bible, there exists
also a voluminous mass of Hebrew writings which are not
included in the sacred canon. These writings are of supreme
importance and value, and the selections which we have made
from them in the present volume give a good idea of their interest,
beauty, and subtlety of thought.
</p>

<p>
From the very beginning of their history the Hebrews were
a deeply poetic race. They were fully alive to the beauties of external
nature, and no national poetry contains more vivid
descriptions of the sea, sky, and the panorama of forest, stream
and mountain, peopled by the varied activities of animated
<pb n='iv'/><anchor id='Pgiv'/>
nature. The songs of Zion glow with poetic enthusiasm, but
their principal characteristic is their intense earnestness. They
are no idle lays of love and wine or warlike triumph. They
depict the joy of existence as dependent upon the smile and
favor of Jehovah, and all the happiness, plenty, victory and
success of life are attributed, without hesitation, to nothing else
but <q>the loving-kindness of the Lord.</q> Yet this religious
fervor becomes the basis of sublimity, pathos, and picturesqueness,
such as can seldom be approached even by the finest productions
of the Attic muse.
</p>

<p>
But the Hebrews were also philosophers, and if they never
attained to what we may call the <foreign rend='italic'>netteté et clarté</foreign>
of the Greek metaphysician, they excelled all other thinkers in the boldness
and profound spirituality of their philosophical mysticism. In
proof of this assertion we may point to that body of writings
known as the Kabbalah.
</p>

<p>
The word <q>Kabbalah</q> means <q>doctrine received by oral
tradition,</q> and is applied to these remains to distinguish them
from the canonical Hebrew Scriptures, which were written
by <q>the Finger of Jehovah.</q> Hebrew speculation attempts in
the Kabbalah to give a philosophical or theosophistic basis to
Hebrew belief, while at the same time it supplements the doctrines
of the Old Testament. For instance, it is a disputed point
whether the immortality of the soul is taught in the Hebrew
canon, but in the Kabbalah it is taken for granted, and a complete
and consistent psychology is propounded, in which is
included the Oriental theory of metempsychosis. This account
of the human soul, as distinct from the human body, treats of
the origin and eternal destiny of man's immortal part. On the
other hand God and Nature, and the connection between the
Creator and the creation, are most exactly treated of in detail.
God is the <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>En-Soph</foreign>, the boundless One, as in
modern philosophy God is the Absolute. He manifests Himself in the ten
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Sephiroth</foreign>,
or intelligences. It would be easy on this point to show Dante's
indebtedness to the Kabbalah in his description of the various
heavens of his Paradise. These intelligences control, in groups
of three, the three worlds of intellect, of soul, and of matter.
The tenth of the <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Sephiroth</foreign> is called Kingdom,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the personal
Deity, as seen in the workings of Providence, with which conception
we may compare Dante's description of Fortune, in the
<pb n='v'/><anchor id='Pgv'/>
seventh book of the <q>Inferno.</q> This last of the
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Sephiroth</foreign> is
manifested visibly in the Shekinah. This is the barest and
baldest outline of the main features in this famous system.
</p>

<p>
The rise of Kabbalism is not very clearly known as regards
authorship and date; it is in turn, by different Jewish writers,
ascribed to Adam, Abraham, Moses and Ezra; but doubtless the
work is an aggregation of successive writings, and some critics
believe that it was not compiled before the Middle Ages, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, in
the centuries between the conquest of Gaul by the Franks and
the period following the death of Dante.
</p>

<p>
There can be no doubt that the Kabbalah contains the ripest
fruit of spiritual and mystical speculation which the Jewish
world produced on subjects which had hitherto been obscured by
the gross anthropomorphism of such men as Maimonides and
his school. We can understand the revolt of the devout Hebrew
mind from traditions like those which represented Jehovah as
wearing a phylactery, and as descending to earth for the purpose
of taking a razor and shaving the head and beard of Sennacherib.
The theory of the <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Sephiroth</foreign> was at least a
noble and truly reverent guess at the mode of God's immanence in
nature. This conception won the favor of Christian philosophers
in the Middle Ages, and, indeed, was adopted or adapted
by the angelic Doctor Aquinas himself, the foremost of ecclesiastical
and scholastic metaphysicians. The psychology of the
Kabbalah, even its treatment of the soul's preëxistence before
union with the body, found many advocates among Gentile
and even Christian philosophers.
</p>

<p>
We are therefore led to the conclusion that the Kabbalah is
by far the most exalted, the most profound and the most interesting
of all that mass of traditional literature which comprises,
among other writings, such remains as the Targums and the
Talmud.
</p>

<p>
A study of Hebrew literature would indeed be incomplete
unless it included the Talmud.
</p>

<p>
<q>Talmud</q> in Hebrew means <q>Doctrine,</q> and this strange
work must be looked upon as a practical handbook, intended
for the Jews who, after the downfall of Jerusalem and the Dispersion,
found that most of the Law had to be adjusted to new
circumstances, in which the institution of sacrifices and propitiatory
offerings had been practically abolished. The Talmud
<pb n='vi'/><anchor id='Pgvi'/>
contains the decisions of Jewish doctors of many generations
on almost every single question which might puzzle the conscience
of a punctilious Jew in keeping the Law under the
altered conditions of the nation. The basis of the Talmud is the
Mishna, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, an explanation of the text of the Mosaic laws, and
their application to new cases and circumstances. The Mishna
has been well described by the illustrious Spanish Jew, Maimonides,
who in the twelfth century published it at Cordova,
with a preface, in which he says: <q>From Moses, our teacher,
to our holy rabbi, no one has united in a single body of doctrine
what was publicly taught as the oral law; but in every generation,
the chief of the tribunal, or the prophet of his day, made
memoranda of what he had heard from his predecessors and
instructors, and communicated it orally to the people. In like
manner each individual committed to writing, for his own use
and according to the degree of his ability, the oral laws and
the information he had received respecting the interpretation
of the Bible, with the various decisions that had been pronounced
in every age and sanctified by the authority of the great
tribunal. Such was the form of proceeding until the coming
of our Rabbi the Holy, who first collected all the traditions, the
judgments, the sentences, and the expositions of the law,
heard by Moses, our master, and taught in each generation.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Mishna itself in turn became the subject of a series of
comments and elucidations, which formed what was called the
Gemara. The text of the original Hebrew scripture was abandoned,
and a new crop of casuistical quibbles, opinions and
decisions rose like mushrooms upon the text of the Mishna, and
from the combination of text and Gemaraic commentary was
formed that odd, rambling, and sometimes perplexing work,
<q>wonderful monument of human industry, human wisdom
and human folly,</q> which we know as the Talmud. The book
is compounded of all materials, an encyclopædia of history, antiquities
and chronology, a story book, a code of laws and conduct,
a manual of ethics, a treatise on astronomy, and a medical
handbook; sometimes indelicate, sometimes irreverent, but always
completely and persistently in earnest. Its trifling frivolity,
its curious prying into topics which were better left alone,
the occasional beauty of its spiritual and imaginative fancies,
make it one of the most remarkable books that human wit and
human industry have ever compiled.
</p>

<pb n='vii'/><anchor id='Pgvii'/>

<p>
The selections which we print in this volume are from the
Mishna, and form part of the Sedarim, or orders; in them are
given minute directions as to the ceremonial practice of the
Jewish religion.
</p>

<p>
The treatise on <q>Blessings</q> speaks of daily prayers and
thanksgiving. It is most minute in prescribing the position of
the body, and how the voice is to be used in prayer. It
specifies the prayers to be said on seeing signs and wonders,
on building a house, on entering or leaving a city; and how to
speak the name of God in social salutations. That on the
<q>Sabbatical Year</q> is a discourse on agriculture from a religious
point of view. The Sabbatical year among the Hebrews
was every seventh year, in which the land was to be
left fallow and uncultivated, and all debts were to be remitted
or outlawed. Provision is made in this section for doing certain
necessary work, such as picking and using fruits which
may have grown without cultivation during the Sabbatical
year, with some notes on manuring the fields, pruning trees and
pulling down walls. Very interesting is the section which deals
with <q>The Sabbath Day.</q> The most minute and exhaustive
account is given of what may and what may not be done on the
seventh day.
</p>

<p>
The treatise on <q>The Day of Atonement</q> deals with the
preparation and deportment of the high-priest on that day.
That on <q>The Passover</q> treats of the Lamb to be sacrificed,
of the search for leaven, so that none be found in the house, and
of all the details of the festival. <q>Measurements</q> is an interesting
and valuable account of the dimensions of the Temple
at Jerusalem. <q>The Tabernacle</q> deals with the ritual worship
of the Jews under the new conditions of their exile from
Palestine.
</p>

<p>
All of these treatises show the vitality of Jewish religion
in Europe, under the most adverse circumstances, and
illustrate the place which the Talmud must have occupied in
Jewish history, as supplying a religious literature and a code of
ritual and worship which kept Judaism united, even when it had
become banished and dissociated from Palestine, Jerusalem, and
the Temple.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Selections From The Talmud</head>
<head type='sub'>Translated by Joseph Barclay, LL.D.</head>

<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Translator's Introduction</head>

<p>
The Talmud (teaching) comprises the Mishna and the
Gemara. The Mishna (<q>learning</q> or <q>second law</q>)
was, according to Jewish tradition, delivered to Moses
on Mount Sinai. <q>Rabbi Levi, the son of Chama, says, Rabbi
Simon, the son of Lakish, says, what is that which is written,
<q>I will give thee tables of stone, and a law and commandments
which I have written, that thou mayest teach them</q>?<note place='foot'>Exod. xxiv.
12.</note> The Tables are the ten commandments; the Law is the written
law; and the commandment is the Mishna; <q>which I have
written</q> means the prophets and sacred writings; <q>that thou
mayest teach them</q> means the Gemara. It teaches us that
they were all given to Moses from Mount Sinai.</q> From
Moses the Mishna was transmitted by oral tradition through
forty <q>Receivers,</q> until the time of Rabbi Judah the Holy.
These Receivers were qualified by ordination to hand it on
from generation to generation. Abarbanel and Maimonides
disagree as to the names of these Receivers. While the Temple
still stood as a centre of unity to the nation, it was considered
unlawful to reduce these traditions to writing. But
when the Temple was burned, and the Jews were dispersed
among other peoples, it was considered politic to form them
into a written code, which should serve as a bond of union,
and keep alive the spirit of patriotism. The Jewish leaders
saw the effect of Constitutions and Pandects in consolidating
nations&mdash;the advantage of written laws over arbitrary decisions.
Numberless precedents of case law, answering to our
common law, were already recorded: and the teachings of the
Hebrew jurisconsults, or <q><foreign rend='italic'>Responsa prudentium</foreign></q>
which were held to be binding on the people, had been preserved from
former ages.
</p>

<p>
All these traditions Rabbi Judah the Holy undertook to
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
reduce into one digest. And this laborious work he completed
about <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 190, or more than a century after the destruction
of Jerusalem by Titus. Rabbi Judah was born on the day
that Rabbi Akibah died. Solomon is said to have foretold
the event: <q>One sun ariseth, and one sun goeth down.</q>
Akibah was the setting and Judah the rising sun. The Mishna
of Rabbi Judah, afterward revised by Abba Areka in Sura, is
the text of the Babylon Talmud. The commentaries written
on this text by various Rabbis in the neighborhood of Babylon,
until the close of the fifth century, are called the Gemara
(completion), and are published in twelve folio volumes,
called the Babylon Talmud&mdash;the Talmud most esteemed by
the Jews. The Jerusalem Talmud contains commentaries
written partly by Rabbis in Jamnia and partly in Tiberias,
where they were completed by Rabbi Jochanan in the beginning
of the fourth century. As now published it has only
four out of the six orders or books of the Mishna, with the
treatise Niddah from the sixth. In the time of Maimonides it
contained five orders. On twenty-six treatises it has no Gemara,
though in the treatise on shekels the Gemara of Jerusalem
is used for the Babylon Talmud. The six books of the
Mishna are subdivided into sixty-three treatises, in the following
manner:
</p>

<p>
Book I
</p>

<p>
This book, called Order of Seeds, contains the following
treatises:
</p>

<p>
1. <q>Blessings,</q> together with prayers and thanksgivings,
with the times and places in which they are to be used.
</p>

<p>
2. <q>A Corner of a Field</q> (Lev. xxiii. 22; Deut. xxiv. 19)
treats of the corners of the field to be left for the poor to glean
them&mdash;the forgotten sheaves, olives, and grapes&mdash;and of giving
alms, etc.
</p>

<p>
3. <q>Doubtful</q> treats of the doubt about the tithes being
paid, as the Jews were not allowed to use anything without
its being first tithed.
</p>

<p>
4. <q>Diversities</q> (Lev. xix. 19; Deut. xxii. 9-11) treats of
the unlawful mixing or joining together things of a different
nature or kind&mdash;of sowing seeds of a different species in one
<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>
bed&mdash;grafting a scion on a stock of a different kind, suffering
cattle of different kinds to come together.
</p>

<p>
5. <q>The Sabbatical Year</q> (Exod. xxiii. 11; Lev. xxv. 4)
treats of the laws which regulated the land as it lay fallow and
rested.
</p>

<p>
6. <q>Heave Offerings</q> (Num. xviii. 8) treats of separating
the heave offering&mdash;who may eat it, and who may not eat of
it&mdash;of its pollutions, etc.
</p>

<p>
7. <q>The First Tithes</q> (Lev. xxvii. 30; Num. xviii. 28)
treats of the law of tithes for the priests.
</p>

<p>
8. <q>The Second Tithes</q> (Deut. xiv. 22; xxvi. 14) treats
of those which were to be carried to Jerusalem and there
eaten, or to be redeemed and the money spent in Jerusalem
in peace offerings.
</p>

<p>
9. <q>Cake of Dough</q> (Num. xv. 20) treats of setting apart
a cake of dough for the priests; also, from what kind of dough
the cake must be separated.
</p>

<p>
10. <q>Uncircumcised Fruit</q> (Lev. xix. 23) treats of the unlawfulness
of eating the fruit of any tree till the fifth year.
The first three years it is uncircumcised; the fourth year it is
holy to the Lord; the fifth year it may be eaten.
</p>

<p>
11. <q>First Fruits</q> (Exod. xxiii. 19; Deut. xxvi. 1) treats
of what fruits were to be offered in the Temple, and in what
manner; also of the baskets in which they were to be carried.
</p>

<p>
Book II
</p>

<p>
The Order Of The Festivals:
</p>

<p>
1. <q>Sabbath</q> treats of the laws relating to the seventh
day.
</p>

<p>
2. <q>Mixtures,</q> or combinations, treats of the extension of
boundaries, whereby all the inhabitants of the court, or entry,
where the mixture is made, are counted as one family inhabiting
one domicile; and are therefore allowed to carry
victuals from one house to another. It also treats of the
mixtures for a Sabbath day's journey, whereby the distance
may be extended for an additional 2,000 cubits.
</p>

<p>
3. <q>Passovers</q> treats of all rites and ceremonies relating
to the Paschal Lamb.
</p>

<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>

<p>
4. <q>Shekels</q> (Exod. xxx. 13) treats of the half shekel,
which every Jew, rich or poor, was obliged to pay every year
to the daily sacrifice.
</p>

<p>
5. <q>Day of Atonement</q> treats of the solemnities peculiar
to it.
</p>

<p>
6. <q>Tabernacles</q> teaches how they are to be built, and how
to be used.
</p>

<p>
7. <q>The Egg Laid on a Festival</q> treats of the works which
may or may not be done on any of the festivals, which are
called days of holy convocation, on which no servile work may
be done.
</p>

<p>
8. <q>New Year</q> treats of the laws and solemnities of the
feast of the New Year, as also of the feasts of the New Moons.
</p>

<p>
9. <q>Fasts</q> treats of the various fasts throughout the year.
</p>

<p>
10. <q>The Roll</q> treats of the feast of Purim, and gives instructions
how and in what manner the Book of Esther and
other Lessons are to be read. The Gemara directs Jews to
get so drunk on this feast, that they cannot discern the difference
between <q>Blessed be Mordecai and cursed be Haman,</q>
and <q>Cursed be Mordecai and blessed be Haman.</q>
</p>

<p>
11. <q>Minor Feasts</q> treats of the works that may and that
may not be lawfully done on the 2d, 3d, 4th, 5th, and 6th days,
when the first and seventh are holy; these intermediate days
being lesser festivals.
</p>

<p>
12. <q>Sacrifices on Festivals</q> treats of the three great festivals,
when all the males were obliged to appear before the
Lord, and of the sacrifices which they were to bring. It also
lays down rules for the dissolution of vows, which it says <q>are
like mountains hanging on a hair, for the text is slender and
the constitutions many.</q>
</p>

<p>
Book III
</p>

<p>
On Women:
</p>

<p>
1. <q>Brother's Widow</q> (Deut. xxv. 5-11) treats of the law
obliging a brother to marry the relict of his deceased brother;
also, when the obligation is to take place, and the ceremonies
to be used at its performance.
</p>

<p>
2. <q>Marriage Settlements</q> treats of dowries and women
<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
who happen to obtain estates, either real or personal. From
this tract the baptism of infant proselytes can be proved.
</p>

<p>
3. <q>Vows</q> (Num. xxx. 4-16) shows when vows are binding
and when null and void. When a married woman makes
a vow the husband can confirm or annul it. This tract points
out what vows fall under his cognizance and what do not.
</p>

<p>
4. <q>The Nazarite</q> (Num. vi. 21) treats of the laws relating
to the different sorts of Nazarites.
</p>

<p>
5. <q>Trial of Jealousy</q> (Num. v. 11-31) treats of the mode
of trial and punishment of criminals. Men may go home to
their wives from voluntary wars, but not from wars of command.
This tract shows the miserable state of the Jews at the
destruction of the second Temple, and at the future advent of
the Messiah.
</p>

<p>
6. <q>Divorces</q> treats of the laws relating to divorces, also
the formalities to be observed both before and after they are
given. A man may divorce his wife if she spoil his broth, or
if he find another more handsome.
</p>

<p>
7. <q>Betrothing</q> treats of the laws of espousals and some
other previous rites of marriage. It commands sons to be
taught suitable trades. It states that all ass-drivers are wicked,
camel-drivers are honest, sailors are pious, physicians are destined
for hell, and butchers are company for Amalek.
</p>

<p>
Book IV
</p>

<p>
On Damages:
</p>

<p>
1. <q>First Gate,</q> so called because in the East law is often
administered in the gateway of a city. It treats of all such
damages as may be received from man or beast. It assesses
damages done by a beast according to the benefit which the
beast receives. If it eat a peck of dates its owner would be
fined for a peck of barley, as dates are not more nourishing
for a beast than barley.
</p>

<p>
2. <q>The Middle Gate</q> treats of laws of usury and trusts,
of letting out on hire, of landlord and tenant, etc.
</p>

<p>
3. <q>Last Gate</q> treats of the laws of commerce and co-partnership,
of buying and selling, of the laws of inheritance
and the right of succession.
</p>

<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>

<p>
4. <q>Sanhedrin</q> treats of the great national senate.
</p>

<p>
5. <q>Stripes</q> treats of false witnesses, of the law of the forty
stripes save one, of those who were bound to fly to the cities
of refuge.
</p>

<p>
6. <q>Oaths</q> explains the laws for administering oaths;
when an oath is to be admitted between contending parties
who are qualified to take them. In Hilchoth Eduth. ix. 1 it is
taught that ten sorts of persons are disqualified&mdash;women,
slaves, children, idiots, deaf persons, the blind, the wicked, the
despised, relations, and those interested in their evidence.
</p>

<p>
7. <q>Evidences</q> are a collection of many important decisions
gathered from the testimonies of distinguished
Rabbis. It is observable that the decisions of the School of
Shammai are more rigorous than those of the School of Hillel,
from whence it is inferred that the former adhered more closely
to Scripture, the latter to tradition. The former were the
Scribes, and are now represented by the Karaites, who reject
the Talmud.
</p>

<p>
8. <q>Idolatry,</q> or the worship of stars and meteors, treats
of the way to avoid this grievous sin.
</p>

<p>
9. <q>The Fathers</q> contains a history of those who handed
down the Oral Law, also many maxims and proverbs.
</p>

<p>
10. <q>Punishment</q> treats of the punishment of those disobedient
to the Sanhedrin (Deut. xvii. 8-11).
</p>

<p>
Book V
</p>

<p>
On Holy Things:
</p>

<p>
1. <q>Sacrifices</q> treats of the nature and quality of the offerings;
the time, the place, and the persons, by whom they
ought to be killed, prepared, and offered.
</p>

<p>
2. <q>Meat Offerings</q> treats of the flour, oil, and wine, and
the wave loaves.
</p>

<p>
3. <q>Unconsecrated Things</q> treats of what is clean and unclean,
of not eating the sinew that shrank, and not killing the
dam and her young in one day (Deut. xxii. 6).
</p>

<p>
4. <q>First Born</q> treats of their redemption by money, and
their being offered in sacrifice; also of the tithes of all manner
of cattle.
</p>

<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>

<p>
5. <q>Estimations</q> (Lev. xxvii. 2) treats of the way in which
things devoted to the Lord are to be valued in order to be redeemed
for ordinary use; also, how a priest is to value a field
which a person has sanctified.
</p>

<p>
6. <q>Cutting Off</q> treats of offenders being cut off from the
Lord.
</p>

<p>
7. <q>Exchanges</q> (Lev. xxvii. 10, 33) treats of the way exchanges
are to be effected between sacred things.
</p>

<p>
8. <q>Trespass</q> (Num. v. 6, 8) treats of things partaking
of the nature of sacrilege. It asserts that if a man take away
a consecrated stone or beam he commits no trespass. If he
give it to his companion he commits a trespass, but his companion
commits none. If he build it into his house he commits
no trespass till he lives in the house long enough to gain the
value of a half-farthing. If he take away a consecrated half-farthing
he commits no trespass. If he give it to his companion
he commits a trespass, but his companion commits
none. If he give it to a bath-keeper he commits a trespass
though he does not bathe, because the bath-keeper says to
him, <q>See, the bath is open, go in and bathe.</q>
</p>

<p>
9. <q>The Daily Sacrifice</q> treats of the morning and evening
offerings.
</p>

<p>
10. <q>The Measurements</q> treats of the measurements of
the Temple.
</p>

<p>
11. <q>Birds' Nests</q> treats of the mistakes about doves and
beasts brought into the Temple for sacrifice.
</p>

<p>
Book VI
</p>

<p>
On Purifications:
</p>

<p>
1. <q>Vessels</q> treats of those which convey uncleanness
(Lev. xi. 33).
</p>

<p>
2. <q>Tents</q> (Num. xix. 14) treats of tents and houses retaining
uncleanness, how persons who enter them become unclean,
and how they are to be cleansed.
</p>

<p>
3. <q>Plagues of Leprosy</q> treats of leprosy of men, garments,
or dwellings, how their pollution is conveyed, and how
they are to be purified.
</p>

<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>

<p>
4. <q>The Red Heifer</q> directs how she is to be burned, and
how her ashes are to be used in purifying.
</p>

<p>
5. <q>Purifications</q> teaches how purifications are to be
effected.
</p>

<p>
6. <q>Pools of Water</q> (Num. xxxi. 23) treats of their construction,
and the quantity of water necessary for cleansing.
</p>

<p>
7. <q>Separation</q> of women.
</p>

<p>
8. <q>Liquors</q> that dispose seeds and fruits to receive pollution
(Lev. xi. 38).
</p>

<p>
9. <q>Issues</q> that cause pollution.
</p>

<p>
10. <q>Baptism</q> on the day of uncleanness (Lev. xxii. 6).
</p>

<p>
11. <q>Hands</q> treats of the washing of hands before eating
bread, though dry fruits are allowed to be eaten without such
washing.
</p>

<p>
12. <q>Stalks of Fruit which convey Uncleanness</q> treats of
fruits growing out of the earth, which have a stalk and no
husk. They can be polluted and can pollute, but may not be
compounded with anything that was unclean before. If they
have neither stalks nor husks they neither can be polluted nor
can they pollute. It also treats of the hair and wool that grows
on some fruits, and the beards of barley, etc.
</p>

<p>
From the six books or <q>Orders</q> the Jews call the Babylon
Talmud by the pet name of <q><foreign rend='italic'>Shas</foreign></q> (six). The
language in which it is written is Hebrew intermingled with Aramaic,
Chaldee, Syriac, Arabic, Greek, and Latin words. The
Gemara was first begun by Rabban Judah's two sons, Rabbi
Gamaliel and Rabbi Simeon. It was vigorously carried on
by Rabbi Ashé in Sura, a town on the Euphrates, from 365
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> to 425. He divided the Mishna into its sixty-three
treatises, and every half-year summoned his disciples and assigned
to them two fresh portions of the Law and two of the
Mishna. At each meeting their remarks on these portions
were discussed, and if approved were incorporated into the
Gemara. Rabbis Zabid, Gebhia Rychuma, and Semo of
Pumbedaitha;<note place='foot'>So named from its situation at the mouth (<q>Pum</q>) of
the Bedaitha, a canal between the Tigris and the Euphrates.</note>
and Rabbis Marimer, Adda bar Abbin, Nachman
bar Huno, and Touspho, presidents of the schools of
Sura, labored for its advancement; and it was finally completed
by Rabbi Abino (Rabbina), and sealed by Rabbi José
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
about 498 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> He was the last of the <q>Dictators.</q> Those
who lived after him were called <q>Opinionists,</q> as they did
not dictate any doctrines; but only deduced opinions from
what had already been settled in the canon of the Talmud.
The Opinionists were succeeded by the Sublime Doctors, who
were in turn replaced by the ordinary Rabbis. In addition to
the Talmud there has been handed down a vast amount of
Jewish learning, such as the Bereitha, the Tosephtoth or appendices,
the Mechilta or traditions unknown to Rabbi Judah
the Holy, and the commentaries Sifra and Sifre. Of these
the Jews regard the Bereitha as second to the Mishna. <q>The
mark of Bereitha is <q>the sages learned,</q> or <q>it is once learned,</q>
or <q>it is learned in another one.</q> And everything which is not
disputed of all these things is an established decision. And
whatever is disputed goes according to the concluded decision.
What is disputed in the Bereitha, which is not questioned
in the Mishna, the decision is according to the Mishna. What
is disputed in the Mishna, and not questioned in the Bereitha,
is not to be decided according to the Bereitha. And thus it is
said, <q>If Rabbi Judah the Holy did not teach it, whence could
Rabbi Chayya know it?</q> The exception is, that when the decision
of Rabbi Eliezer, the son of Jacob, is given, it is regarded
as equal to the Mishna. In 102 questions the decision
is always with him.</q>
</p>

<p>
The period during which both the Jerusalem and Babylon
Talmuds were compiled was a season of comparative peace
for the Jews. From the death of Rabbi Judah the Holy until
Constantine ascended the throne the schools in Tiberias were
unmolested. Judah was succeeded in the Patriarchate by
Gamaliel; and he in turn gave way to Judah the second. Being
inferior in learning to some of his own Rabbis, the splendor
of his Patriarchate was eclipsed by the superior talents
of Simon Ben Laches and Rabbi Jochanan. From that time
the Patriarchate gradually sank in estimation, till the struggles
for unlimited power, and the rapacity of the Rabbis,
brought the office into contempt, and caused the Emperor
Honorius in one of his laws to brand them as <q>Devastators.</q>
Still, with a loyal affection to the race of Israel, the Jews,
wherever scattered in the West, looked to Tiberias as their
Zion, and willingly taxed themselves for the support of its
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
Rabbinical schools. The Jews in the East regarded the Prince
of the Captivity or Patriarch of Babylon as their centre and
chief. He rose to power between the abandonment of the
Mesopotamian provinces by Hadrian and the rise of the Persian
kingdom. He presided over his subjects with viceregal
power and a splendid court. Rabbis were his satraps, and
the wise and learned his officers and councillors. Wealth
flowed in upon his people, who were engaged in every kind
of commerce. One of his merchants in Babylon was said to
have had 1,000 vessels on sea and 1,000 cities on shore. There
was for a time a spirit of rivalry between the spiritual courts
of Tiberias and Babylon.
</p>

<p>
On one occasion there was an open schism about the calculation
of the Paschal feast. The struggle for supremacy
took place when Simon, son of Gamaliel, who claimed descent
from Aaron, was Patriarch of Tiberias, and Ahia, who
claimed descent from King David, was Prince of the Captivity.
His two most learned men were Hananiah, the rector
of Nahar-pakod, and Judah, son of Bethuriah. To humble
these men was the aim of Simon. Accordingly he sent two
legates with three letters to Babylon. The first letter was
given to Hananiah. It was addressed, <q>To your holiness.</q>
Flattered by the title, he politely asked the reason of their
visit. <q>To learn your system of instruction.</q> Still more
gratified, he paid them every attention. Availing themselves
of their advantage, the legates used every effort to undermine
his teaching and lessen his authority. Hananiah, enraged by
their conduct, summoned an assembly, and denounced their
treachery. The people cried out, <q>That which thou hast
built, thou canst not so soon pull down; the hedge which thou
hast planted, thou canst not pluck up without injury to thyself.</q>
Hananiah demanded their objections to his teaching.
They answered, <q>Thou hast dared to fix intercalations and
new moons, by which nonconformity has arisen between
Babylon and Palestine.</q> <q>So did Rabbi Akiba,</q> said Hananiah,
<q>when in Babylon.</q> <q>Akiba,</q> they replied, <q>left not
his like in Palestine.</q> <q>Neither,</q> cried Hananiah, <q>have I
left my equal in Palestine.</q> The legates then produced their
second letter, in which it was written, <q>That which thou hast
left a kid is grown up a strong horned goat.</q> Hananiah was
<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
struck dumb. Rabbi Isaac, one of the legates, ran, and
mounted the reading desk. <q>These,</q> said he, calling them
out aloud, <q>are the holy days of God, and these the holy days
of Hananiah.</q>
</p>

<p>
The people began to murmur. Rabbi Nathan, the second
legate, arose, and read the verse of Isaiah, <q>Out of Zion shall
go forth the Law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.</q>
Then in a mocking voice, <q>Out of Babylon shall go forth
the Law, and the Word of the Lord from Nahor-pakod.</q> The
congregation was in an uproar. <q>Alter not the word of God</q>
was the universal shout. The legates then produced the third
letter, threatening excommunication to all who would not
obey their decrees. They further said, <q>The learned have
sent us, and commanded us to say, if he will submit, well; if
not, utter at once the Cherem.<note place='foot'>The
Cherem was most fearful. The excommunicate was cursed with the
curse of Joshua against Jericho, and the curse of Elisha against those that
mocked him, and the curse of fiends of deadly power: <q>Let nothing good come
out of him, let his end be sudden, let all creatures become his enemy, let the
whirlwind crush him, the fever and every other malady, and the edge of
the sword smite him; let his death be unforeseen and drive him into outer
darkness,</q> etc. There were three degrees of excommunication. The first
was <q>the casting out of the synagogue.</q> The second <q>the delivering over to
Satan.</q> And the third was the anathema proclaimed by priests with the sounding
of trumpets.</note> Also set the choice before
our brethren in foreign parts. If they will stand by us, well;
if not, let them ascend their high places. Let Ahia build them
an altar, and Hananiah (a Levite) sing at the sacrifice, and
let them at once set themselves apart, and say, <q>We have no
portion in the God of Israel.</q></q> From every side the cry
arose, <q>Heaven preserve us from heresy; we have still a portion
in the Israel of God.</q> The authority of Tiberias was
then recognized as supreme. But when Babylon was afterward
politically severed from the Roman power in the West,
and fell to the Persians, the Prince of the Captivity represented
the Jews of the East as their independent head.
</p>

<p>
The canon of the Talmud was closed in a season of opulence
and repose. This scene, however, speedily changed. Gloomy
and dark days were followed by a storm of persecution from
the Persian kings, Yesdigird and Firuz <q>the tyrant.</q> When
their schools were closed, the Jews clung more closely to the
Talmud than before. Although never formally adopted by
any general council, all orthodox Jews embraced it as supplying
a want which they felt. And they have adhered to it
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
through long and dreary centuries, despite the rack and fire
of the Inquisitor, and the contempt and scorn of a hostile
world. The Talmud has been periodically banned, and often
publicly burned, from the age of the Emperor Justinian till
the time of Pope Clement VIII. In the year 1569 the famous
Jewish library in Cremona was plundered, and 12,000 copies of
the Talmud and other Jewish writings were committed to the
flames. The first to demand for it toleration and free inquiry
was Reuchlin. He declared that he must oppose the destruction
of <q>a book written by Christ's nearest relations.</q> Before
him, Haschim II, Caliph of Cordova in the close of the
tenth century, had ordered it to be translated into Arabic.
This was done by Rabbi Joseph, the son of Rabbi Moses, surnamed
<q>clad in a sack,</q> because he was thus meanly clad
when his great talents were discovered.
</p>

<p>
The study of the Talmud has the most fascinating influence
over the Jewish mind, and if the latter is to be comprehended,
the teaching which moulds it must be clearly understood.
<q>Everyone,</q> say the Jews, <q>is bound to divide the
time of his study into three parts&mdash;one-third is to be devoted
to the written law, one-third to the Mishna, and one-third to
Gemara.</q> To understand it in accordance with the thirteen
rules of interpretation, it takes a study of seven hours a day
for seven years. They also say that it is lawful to rend a man
ignorant of the Talmud <q>like a fish.</q> Israelites are forbidden
to marry the daughter of such a one, as <q>she is no better than
a beast.</q>
</p>

<p>
To obviate arguments furnished by its own statements
against itself, its adherents make a distinction between its decisions,
its directions, and its legendary or romance part,&mdash;a
distinction fatal to its claim of equality with Holy Scripture.
For this legendary part some of the ancient Rabbis had but
little respect. Rabbi Joshua, son of Levi, says, <q>He who
writes it down will have no part in the world to come; he who
explains it will be scorched.</q> Maimonides also says, <q>If one
of the many foolish rabbis reads these histories and proverbs,
he will find an explanation unnecessary, for to a fool everything
is right, and he finds no difficulty anywhere. And if a
really wise man reads them, there will be but two ways in
which he will consider them. If he takes them in their literal
<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>
sense and thinks them bad, he will say, This is foolishness,
and in so doing he says nothing at all against the foundation
of the faith.</q> The School of Shammai, who lived before
Christ, and the School of Hillel, who lived till eight<note place='foot'>Some
think he died twelve years <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi></note> years
after His birth, are brought forward as contradictory in their
decisions. Like Christian leaders in later times, they strove
to exceed each other in learning and pride. Hillel, called also
the second Ezra, was born in Babylon. His thirst for learning
drove him to Jerusalem. He was so poor he could not
fee the porter of the college. So he used to listen at the window.
One bitter winter's night he became insensible from
cold, and the snow falling fast covered him up. The darkened
window called the attention of those inside to his form without.
He was then brought in, and soon restored to life. It
is said that afterward <q>he had eighty scholars: thirty of them
were fit that the divine glory should rest upon them, as it did
upon Moses&mdash;thirty others were worthy that the sun should
stand still for them, as it did for Joshua&mdash;and twenty were of
a form between.</q>
</p>

<p>
By a sort of legal fiction both schools are supposed to be
of equal authority. A Bath Kol<note place='foot'>The Jews say that the Holy Spirit
spake to the Israelites during the Tabernacle by Urim and Thummim, and
under the first Temple by the Prophets, and under the second by Bath Kol. The
Bath Kol, which signifies <q>daughter voice</q> or <q>daughter of a voice,</q> was
a kind of divine intimation, which was as inferior to the oracular voice proceeding
from the Mercy Seat as a daughter is supposed to be inferior to her
mother. It was said to be preceded by a clap of thunder. This, however, was
not always the case. The Talmud relates that <q>Rabbis Jochanan and Simeon
ben Lachish wished to see the face of Rabbi Samuel, a Babylon Rabbi.
<q>Let us follow,</q> said they, <q>the hearing of Bath Kol.</q> They journeyed near a
school, and as they were passing it they heard a boy reading from the book of
Samuel the words, <q>And Samuel died.</q> Observing this, they concluded that
their friend was dead. And it so happened that news was soon brought to
them that Rabbi Samuel of Babylon had died.</q> The Bath Kol seems to have
been a sort of divination practised with the words of Scripture, like the Sortes
Virgilianæ among the heathen.</note> or holy echo, supplying the
place of departed Urim and Thummim, and of oracles long
since silent, is related to have established it. <q>There came
forth a divine voice at Jabneh and said, The words of the
one and of the other are the words of the living God, but the
certain determination of the thing is according to the School
of Hillel, and whosoever transgresseth against the words of
the School of Hillel deserves death.</q> Both schools were
Pharisees, but the School of Shammai was the straiter sect.
Seven different shades of character have been attributed to
the Pharisees of that age: there were those who served God
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
from selfishness&mdash;those who did it gradually&mdash;those who
avoided the sight of women&mdash;saints in office&mdash;those who asked
you to name some duty which they ought to perform&mdash;those
who were pious from fear of God&mdash;and those who were pious
from love of Him. Popular opinion differed with regard to
them. Some said, <q>If only two men be saved, one must be a
Pharisee</q>; while others defined a Pharisee to be <q>one who
wished to play the part of Zimri, and to claim the reward of
Phinehas.</q> The great opponents of the Pharisees were the
Sadducees, who arose <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 300, and were followers of Baithos
and Sadok. Their rivals on the other side were the Mehestanites,
who returned from the Captivity versed in the
doctrines of Zoroaster&mdash;in astrology, and in the influences
of good and bad spirits. To these might be added the Misraimites,
who studied the Kabbala, specially in reference to
the forms of letters. The letter Koph, for example, has its
curved part severed from its stem, and thus teaches that <q>the
door of mercy is always open to the penitent.</q> The numerical
value of the letters of Messiah and Nachash (serpent) is the
same, and this teaches that <q>the Messiah will overcome the
Serpent.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Kabbalists believed nothing but what they <q>received.</q>
Their teachers received from the prophets&mdash;the prophets received
from angels&mdash;David from the Angel Michael, Moses
from Metatron, Isaac from Raphael, Shem from Yophiel&mdash;and
the angels themselves from God. The Metatron is the connecting
link between the Divine Spirit and the world of matter.
It resembles the Demiurgos of the Gnostics. It is the
mystical expression for the Being that forms a union between
God and nature, or, as the Zohar puts it, between the <q>King
and the Queen.</q> There were also the Essenes, who allegorized
the Law; the Hellenists, who mixed it up with
Greek philosophy; the Therapeutists, who thought supreme
happiness to be meditation; the political Herodians; the
Zealots; and other petty sects who formed the great mass of
the people, and held either with or against the two great
schools. The decisions of both schools are remarkable for
their concise brevity. A phrase suggests many thoughts&mdash;a
single word awakes a whole train of reasoning. A German
writer has said of the Mishna, that <q>it is a firmament of telescopic
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
stars, containing many a cluster of light, which no unaided
eye has ever resolved.</q> Some of its sayings are of
touching beauty. Such are the words of Rabbi Tarphon,
<q>The day is short&mdash;the labor vast;&mdash;but the laborers are
slothful, though the reward is great, and the Master of the
house presseth for despatch.</q> Some of its sayings are extravagant&mdash;some
are loathsome&mdash;and some are blasphemous.
But mixed up as they are together, they form an extraordinary
monument of <q>human industry, human wisdom, and human
folly.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Talmud contains a system of casuistry in reference to
the doctrines of intention and legal uncleanness. It proportions
responsibility to the amount of intention, and thereby
hands over tender consciences to the control of the Rabbis. It
proportions legal uncleanness to every degree of approach to
the source, or, as it is called, <q>the father</q> of uncleanness; and
this again renders necessary continual appeals to the decision
of the Rabbis.
</p>

<p>
Predestination and free will are both taught. <q>Everything
is in the hands of heaven, except the fear of heaven.</q> <q>All
things are ordained of God, but men's actions are their own.</q>
When men wish to sin they are enjoined to go to a place
where they are unknown, and to clothe themselves in black
so as not to dishonor God openly. Hereditary sin was denied
by the early Kabbalists, but the later ones allow it. They believe
that all souls were created in Adam, and therefore partake
of his fall. Every kind of philosophy known at the time
of its compilation is more or less introduced into the Talmud,
and all more or less tinged with Magian superstition. From
this superstition grew the mysticism of the Jewish schools.
All the arts and sciences, under some form or other, are alluded
to, and references to historical events abound in its
pages. When it is dangerous to speak of them openly they
are veiled under some figure known only to the initiated.
Some observations seem to anticipate future discoveries. The
Antipodes are hinted at. And the Jerusalem Gemara says that
Alexander the Great was represented as carrying a ball in his
hand because he believed the figure of the earth to be a sphere.
Astronomy is fully discussed. The planets are <q>moving
stars.</q> Mercury is <q>the star</q>; Venus, <q>splendor</q>; Mars,
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
<q>redness</q>; Jupiter, <q>rightness</q>; Saturn, <q>the Sabbath star.</q>
The signs of the Zodiac have the same names as are now used.
The Galaxy is <q>the river of light.</q> Comets are <q>burning arrows.</q>
And it is said that when a comet passes through Orion
it will destroy the world. A certain Ishmaelite merchant is
related to have invited Rabba to come and see where the
heavens and the earth touched. Rabba took his bread basket
and placed it on the window while he prayed. He afterward
looked for it, but it was gone. He asked the Ishmaelite, <q>Are
there thieves here?</q> <q>No,</q> he replied, <q>but your basket has
gone up in the revolving of the firmament. It will return if
you wait till morning when the revolving of the firmament
returns where it was before.</q>
</p>

<p>
Astrology is treated as a science which governs the life of
man. The stars make men wise. The stars make them rich.
<q>A man born on the first day of the week will excel in only
one quality. He that is born on the second day will be an
angry man, because on that day the waters were divided. He
that is born on the third day of the week will be rich and
licentious, because on it the herbs were created. He that is
born on the fourth day will be wise and of good memory, because
on that day the lights were hung up. He that is born
on the fifth day will be charitable, because on that day the
fishes and fowls were created. He that is born on the Sabbath,
on the Sabbath he also shall die, because on his account
they profaned the great Sabbath day.</q> Rabba bar Shila says,
<q>He shall be eminently holy.</q> Rabbi Chanina says, <q>The
influence of the stars makes wise, the influence of the stars
makes rich, and Israel is under the influence of the stars.</q>
Rabbi Jochanan says, <q>Israel is not under the influence of
the stars. Whence is it proved? <q>Thus saith the Lord, Learn
not the way of the heathen, and be not dismayed at the signs
of heaven, for the heathen are dismayed at them</q> (Jer. x. 2).
The heathen, but not Israel.</q> <q>An eclipse of the sun is an
evil sign to the nations of the world; an eclipse of the moon
is an evil sign to Israel, for Israel reckons by the moon, the
nations of the world by the sun.</q> It is also said that Saturn
and Mars are the baleful stars, and whosoever begins a work,
or walks in the way, when either of these two is in the ascendant,
will come to sorrow. Astrology naturally leads to
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
amulets and charms. Amulets are divided into two classes,
approved and disapproved. An approved amulet is <q>one that
has cured three persons, or has been made by a man who has
cured three persons with other amulets.</q>
</p>

<p>
Charms are abundantly provided against accidents. <q>For
bleeding of the nose let a man be brought to a priest named
Levi, and let the name Levi be written backward. If there
be not a priest, get a layman, who is to write backward <q>Ana
pipi Shila bar Sumki,</q> or <q>Taam dli bemi ceseph, taam dli
bemi pagam</q>; or let him take a root of grass, and the cord
of an old bed, and paper, and saffron, and the red part of the
inside of a palm tree, and let him burn them together, and
let him take some wool, and twist two threads, and dip them
in vinegar, and roll them in ashes, and put them into his nose;
or let him look out for a stream of water which flows from
east to west, and let him go and stand with one leg on each
side of it, and let him take with his right hand some mud from
under his left foot, and with his left hand from under his right
foot, and let him twist two threads of wool, and dip them in
the mud, and put them into his nose.</q> If a man be bitten by
a mad dog he must die, unless some remedy be found for him.
<q>Abai says he must take the skin of a male adder, and write
upon it, <q>I, M, the son of the woman N, upon the skin of a
male adder, write against thee, Kanti Kanti Klirus, but some
say, Kandi Kandi Klurus, Lord of Hosts. Amen. Selah.</q>
Let him also cast off his clothes, and bury them in a graveyard
for twelve months of a year; then let him take them up, and
burn them in a furnace, and let him strew the ashes at the
parting of the roads. And during these twelve months let
him only drink out of a brass tube, lest he see the phantom
form of the demon, and he be endangered. This was done by
Abba, the son of Martha&mdash;he is Abba, the son of Manjumi.
His mother made him a tube of gold.</q>
</p>

<p>
Magic naturally follows from such teaching. Abba Benjamin
says, <q>If leave had been given to see the hurtful demons,
no creature could stand before them.</q> Abbai says, <q>They are
more than we are, and stand against us, like the trench round
a garden bed.</q> Rav Huni says, <q>Everyone has a thousand
on his left hand, and ten thousand on his right hand.</q> Rabba
says, <q>The want of room at the sermon is from them, the
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
wearing out of the Rabbis' clothes is from their rubbing
against them, bruised legs are from them.</q> <q>Whosoever
wishes to know their existence, let him take ashes passed
through a sieve, and strew them in his bed, and in the morning
he will see the marks of a cock's claws. Whosoever wishes
to see them, let him take the inner covering of a black cat,
the kitten of a first-born black cat, which is also the kitten of
a first-born, and let him burn it in the fire, and powder it, and
fill his eyes with it, and he will see them. And let him pour the
powder into an iron tube, and seal it with an iron signet, lest
they steal any of it, and let him seal the mouth of it, lest any
harm ensue. Rav Bibi bar Abbai did thus, and he was harmed,
but the Rabbis prayed for mercy, and he was healed.</q> Arts
of sorcery are attributed to the Rabbis. They are represented
as having the power to create both men and melons. One of
them is said to have changed a woman into an ass, and ridden
the ass to market, when another sorcerer changed the ass
again into a woman.
</p>

<p>
This sorcery is traced to Abraham, who is said (Gen. xxv. 6)
to have given his sons gifts. These gifts are stated to have
been the arts of sorcery. Legends abound everywhere
throughout the Talmud. Rabbi Judah said, Rav said, <q>Everything
that God created in the world, He created male and
female. And thus he did with leviathan, the piercing serpent,
and leviathan the crooked serpent. He created them male
and female; but if they had been joined together they would
have desolated the whole world. What then did the Holy
One do? He enervated the male leviathan, and slew the female,
and salted her for the righteous in the time to come,
for it is said, <q>And He shall slay the dragon that is in the sea</q>
(Isa. xxvii. 1). Likewise, with regard to behemoth upon a
thousand mountains, He created them male and female; but
if they had been joined together they would have desolated
the whole world. What then did the Holy One do? He
enervated the male behemoth, and made the female barren,
and preserved her for the righteous in the time to come. That
period is to be a season of great feasting. The liquor to be
drunk will be apple-wine of more than seventy years old. The
cup of David alone will hold one hundred and twenty-one logs.
It is related that a Rabbi once saw in a desert a flock of geese
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
so fat that their feathers fell off, and the rivers flowed in fat.
He said to them, <q>Shall we have part of you in the world to
come?</q> One of them lifted up a wing and another a leg, to
signify the parts we shall have. We should otherwise have
had all parts of these geese, but that their sufferings are owing
to us. It is our iniquities that have delayed the coming of the
Messiah, and these geese suffer greatly by reason of their excessive
fat, which daily increases, and will increase till the
Messiah comes.</q>
</p>

<p>
Rabba bar Chama says that he once saw <q>a bird so tall,
that its head reached to the sky and its legs to the bottom of
the ocean.</q> The water in which it stood was so deep that a
carpenter's axe which had fallen in seven years before had not
then reached the bottom. He also saw <q>a frog as large as a
village containing sixty houses.</q> This frog was swallowed
up by a serpent, and this serpent in turn by a crow; this crow
flew, and perched upon a cedar, and this cedar was as broad
as sixteen wagons abreast. There is also an account of a fish
which was killed by a worm. This fish, when driven ashore,
destroyed sixty cities, and sixty cities ate of it, and sixty cities
salted it, and with its bones the ruined cities were rebuilt.
Stories are also told of fishes with eyes like the moon, and of
horned fishes three hundred miles in length. These stories are
intended to confirm the text, <q>They that go down to the sea in
ships, that do business in great waters; these see the works of
the Lord and his wonders in the deep</q> (Ps. cvii. 23, 24). To
illustrate the statement of Amos (iii. 8), a story is told of a lion
which one of the Cæsars wished to see. At 400 miles distance
he roared, and the walls of Rome fell. At 300 miles he again
roared, and all the people fell on their backs, and their teeth
fell out, and Cæsar fell off his throne. Cæsar then prayed for
his removal to a safer distance.
</p>

<p>
The Talmud informs us that <q>a young unicorn, one day
old, is as large as Mount Tabor.</q> Consequently Noah had
great difficulty in saving an old one alive. He could not get
it into the ark, so he bound it by its horn to the side of the
ark. At the same time Og, King of Bashan (being one of
the antediluvians), was saved by riding on its back. We are
further informed that he was one of the giants who came
from the intermarriage of angels with the daughters of men.
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
His footsteps were forty miles long, and one of his teeth
served to make a couch for Abraham. When the Israelites
came against him under the command of Moses, he inquired
the size of their camp, and hearing that it was three miles in
extent he tore up a mountain of that size, to hurl it upon them.
Grasshoppers were, however, sent to bore holes in it, so that it
fell over his head on to his neck. His teeth also grew and
were entangled in the rocks, as the Psalmist says, <q>Thou hast
broken the teeth of the ungodly</q> (Ps. iii. 7). He is also said
to be identical with Eliezer the servant of Abraham, and to
have been, like Enoch, translated to Paradise. This account,
however, differs widely from the statements of the Jerusalem
Targum on the Book of Numbers (xxi. 34).
</p>

<p>
The Talmud affirms that Adam was made from dust of all
parts of the earth; and that he was created with two faces, as
it is written, <q>Thou hast beset me behind and before</q> (Ps.
cxxxix. 5). The Rabbis further state that he was formed in
two parts, one male and one female. His height before his
fall reached to the firmament, but after his fall God put his
hand upon him, and compressed him small. In the tenth hour
after he was made, he sinned; and in the twelfth he was driven
out of Paradise. Abraham is said to have put Sarah into a
box when he brought her into Egypt, that none should see
her beauty. At the custom-house toll was demanded. Abraham
said he was ready to pay. The custom-house officers
said, <q>Thou bringest clothes.</q> He said, <q>I will pay for
clothes.</q> They said, <q>Thou bringest gold.</q> He said, <q>I will
pay for gold.</q> They said, <q>Thou bringest silk.</q> He said, <q>I
will pay for silk.</q> They said, <q>Thou bringest pearls.</q> He
said, <q>I will pay for pearls.</q> They said, <q>Thou must open
the box,</q> whereupon her splendor shone over the whole land
of Egypt.
</p>

<p>
Abraham, it is also said, had a precious stone hung around
his throat, on which when the sick looked they were healed.
Some of the laws of Sodom are also recorded: <q>Whosoever
cut off the ears of another's ass received the ass till his ears
grew again.</q> <q>Whosoever wounded another, the man
wounded was obliged to pay him for letting his blood.</q> When
the judges of Sodom attempted to fine Eliezer, the servant
of Abraham, because another man had wounded him, he took
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
up a stone and flung it at the judge. He then bid the judge
to pay the fine, which was now due to him for letting his blood,
to the man who had first wounded him. There was a public
bed in Sodom, and every stranger was obliged to lie in it. If
his legs were too long for it, they were cut off; and if too
short, they were racked out to the proper length. When a
traveller came, each citizen, to show his hospitality, was
obliged to give him a coin with his name written upon it. The
traveller was then deprived of bread; and when he had died
of starvation, the citizens came, and each one took back his
own money. The Sodomites thus kept up their character for
liberality.
</p>

<p>
At the giving of the Law the Israelites stood at the lower
part of the mount (Exod. xix. 17). Rabbi Avidmi says,
<q>these words teach us that the Holy One, blessed be He,
turned the mountain over them like a tub, and said to them,
<q>If ye will receive the Law, well; but if not, there shall be your
grave.</q></q> Rabbi Joshua says, <q>As each commandment proceeded
from the mouth of the Holy One, Israel retreated
twelve miles, and the ministering angels led them back, as
it is said, <q>The angels of the host did flee apace</q><note place='foot'>The Rabbis
make two changes in this verse&mdash;they change <q>kings</q> into
<q>angels,</q> and <q>fled</q> into <q>led.</q></note> (Ps. lxviii.
13). Do not read <q>they fled</q> but <q>they led.</q></q> Rabbi Eliezer,
the Modite, says, that Jethro <q>heard the giving of the Law;
for when the Law was given to Israel His voice went from
one end of the world to the other, and all the nations of the
world were seized with trembling in their temples, and they
repeated a hymn, as it is said, <q>In His temple doth everyone
speak of His glory</q></q> (Ps. xxix. 9). The question is asked,
<q>Why are the Gentiles defiled?</q> <q>Because they did not
stand on Mount Sinai, for in the hour the serpent came to
Eve he communicated defilement, which was removed from
Israel when they stood on Mount Sinai.</q> Rav Acha, the son
of Rabbi, said to Rav Ashai, <q>How then is it with proselytes?</q>
He answered, <q>Although they went not there,
their lucky star was there, as it is written, <q>With <emph>him</emph> that
standeth here with us this day before the Lord our God, and
also with <emph>him</emph> that <emph>is</emph> not here with us this day</q></q>
(Deut. xxix. 15).
</p>

<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>

<p>
In the hour that Moses ascended up on high the ministering
angels said before God, <q>O Lord of the world, what business
has he that is born of woman amongst us?</q> He answered,
<q>He is come to receive the Law.</q> They replied,
<q>This desirable treasure, which has been treasured up from
the six days of creation, six hundred and seventy-four generations
before the world was created, dost Thou now wish to
give it to flesh and blood? what is man that Thou art mindful
of him? and the son of man that Thou visitest him? O Lord,
our Lord, how excellent is Thy name in all the earth, Who
hast set Thy glory above the heavens.</q> The Holy One said
to Moses, <q>Return them an answer.</q> He said, <q>O Lord of
the world, I fear, lest they burn me with the breath of their
mouth.</q> God said, <q>Lay hold on the throne of my glory, and
return them an answer; for it is said, <q>He that holdeth the face
of His throne, He spreadeth His cloud over him</q></q> (Job xxvi.
9). Rabbi Nahum says, <q>This means that the Almighty
spread some of the glory of the Shechinah and His cloud
over him.</q> He then said, <q>Lord of the world, what is written
in the Law that Thou art about to give me?</q> <q>I am the
Lord thy God, that brought thee out of Egypt.</q> He then
said, <q>Did ye (angels) ever go down into Egypt and serve
Pharaoh? why then should ye have the Law?</q> Again,
<q>What is written therein?</q> <q>Thou shalt have none other
God.</q> He then asked them, <q>Do ye then dwell among the
uncircumcised, that ye should commit idolatry?</q> Again,
<q>What is written?</q> <q>Remember the Sabbath day to sanctify
it.</q> <q>Do ye then do any work so as to need rest?</q> Again,
<q>What is written?</q> <q>Thou shalt not take the name of the
Lord in vain.</q> <q>Have ye then any work that would lead to
this sin?</q> Again, <q>What is written?</q> <q>Honor thy father
and mother.</q> <q>Have ye then got any father or mother?</q>
Again, <q>What is written?</q> <q>Thou shalt do no murder.</q>
<q>Thou shalt not commit adultery.</q> <q>Thou shalt not steal.</q>
<q>Have ye then envy or the principle of evil amongst you?</q>
Immediately they praised the Holy One, <q>Blessed be He.</q>
</p>

<p>
Wonderful stories are told of the manna. The manna is
said to have fallen from heaven, accompanied by showers of
pearls and precious stones. It tasted to everyone according
to his desire. If one wished for fat fowl, so it tasted. If another
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
other wished for honey, so it tasted, as it is written, <q>Thou
hast lacked nothing</q> (Deut. xi. 7). The Targum of Jonathan
goes on to inform us, <q>At the fourth hour, when the sun had
waxed hot upon it, it melted and became streams of water,
which flowed away into the great sea, and wild animals that
were clean, and cattle, came to drink of it, and the children of
Israel hunted and ate them</q> (Exod. xvi. 21). It is further
related that the Queen of Sheba (whom the Rabbis labor to
prove to have been the King of Sheba) wished to test the
knowledge of Solomon who had written on botany <q>from the
cedar to the hyssop.</q> She once stood at a distance from him
with two exquisite wreaths of flowers&mdash;one artificial, one
natural. They were so much alike that the King looked perplexed,
and the courtiers looked melancholy. Observing a
swarm of bees on the window, he commanded it to be opened.
All the bees lighted on the natural and not one on the artificial
wreath. Solomon is also said to have sent Benaiah, the son
of Jehoiada, to bind Aschmedai, the king of the devils. After
deceiving the devil with wine he made him reveal the secret
of the Schamir, or little worm, which can cleave the hardest
stone. And by the aid of this worm Solomon built the Temple.
The devil afterward asked Solomon for his signet ring,
and when he had given it to him the devil stretched one wing
up to the firmament and the other to the earth, and jerked
Solomon four hundred miles away. Then assuming the aspect
of Solomon, he seated himself on his throne. After Solomon
had again obtained it, he wrote, <q>What profit hath a man of
all his labor which he taketh under the sun?</q> (Eccles. i. 3).
</p>

<p>
A story is told of Nebuzaradan, that he saw the blood of
Zecharias bubbling in the court of the priests. When he asked
what it meant, he was informed that it was the blood of
bullocks and lambs. When he had ordered bullocks and lambs
to be slain, the blood of Zecharias still bubbled and reeked
above theirs. The priests then confessed that it was the blood
of a priest and prophet and judge, whom they had slain. He
then commanded eighty thousand priests to be put to death.
The blood, however, still continued to bubble. God then said,
<q>Is this man, who is but flesh and blood, filled with pity toward
my children, and shall not I be much more?</q> So he
gave a sign to the blood, and it was swallowed up in the place.
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
Of the eighty thousand priests slain none was left but Joshua
the son of Jozedek, of whom it is written, <q>Is not this a brand
plucked out of the fire?</q> (Zech. iii. 2). Of Titus it is said
that he was unclean in the Temple, and with a blow of his
sword rent the veil, which flowed with blood. To punish him
a gnat was sent into his brain, which grew as large as a dove.
When his skull was opened, the gnat was found to have a mouth
of copper, and claws of iron.
</p>

<p>
The Talmud teaches that evil spirits, devils, and goblins
are the offspring of Adam. They are said to fly about in all
directions. They know from eavesdropping what is to come
in the future. Like men, they eat, drink, and multiply. They
are represented as playing men awkward tricks. One is stated
to have broken a vessel of wine, and to have spilled it on the
ground. The Rabbis, however, afterward compelled him to
pay for it. People are forbidden to ride oxen fresh from the
stall, as Satan dances between their horns. Men are forbidden
to salute their companions by night, lest they may turn
out to be devils. It is also commanded to shake out, before
drinking, some water from the vessel, to get rid of what is
sipped by the evil spirits. It is, however, permitted to consult
Satan on week-days. He is considered identical with the
Angel of Death. But he is described as having no power over
those engaged in reading the law. Many of his devices are
related in the Talmud, whereby he made learned men leave
off reading, and then he snatched away their souls. A story
is told of the attempt of Rabbi Joshua, the son of Levi, and
Satan to deceive each other about the Rabbi's place in paradise.
Finally, however, Satan managed to take away his life,
whereupon the voice of Elijah is heard shouting in heaven,
<q>Make room for the son of Levi,</q>&mdash;<q>Make room for the son
of Levi.</q> The Angel of Death is represented as standing at
the head of the dying man. He has a drawn sword in his hand,
on which is a drop of gall. When the dying man sees it, he
shudders and opens his mouth. The Angel of Death then lets
it fall into his mouth. The sick man dies, corrupts, and becomes
pale. Three days the soul flies about the body, thinking
to return to it, but after it sees the appearance of the face
changed, it leaves it and goes away.
</p>

<p>
Rabbi Isaac moreover asserts, that a worm in a dead body
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
is as painful as a needle in a living one. The Talmud still
further states that there are three voices continually heard&mdash;the
voice of the sun as he rolls in his orbit&mdash;the voice of the
multitudes of Rome&mdash;and the voice of the soul as it leaves the
body. The Rabbis, however, prayed for mercy on the soul,
and this voice has ceased. Instances are also given of men
overhearing the conversations of the dead, and receiving profit
from them. A man is said to have heard one girl tell another
in the grave, that those who sowed their crops at a particular
time would find their harvests fail. So he took care to sow
at another time, and he had an abundant yield. It is also said
that every Friday evening a second soul enters into the bodies
of men, and that it remains to the end of the Sabbath, when
it departs. The evidence of this second soul is shown by an
increased appetite for eating and drinking.
</p>

<p>
Good angels are stated to be daily created out of the stream
of glory which flows from the throne of God, and they sing
a new song, and vanish; as it is said, <q>They are new every
morning: great is thy faithfulness</q> (Lam. iii. 23). The
Rabbis also say that angels are created out of every word which
proceeds from the mouth of God; as it is said, <q>By the word
of the LORD were the heavens made; and all the host of them
by the breath of His mouth</q> (Ps. xxxiii. 6). The following
story is also told: In the hour when Nimrod, the impious,
cast Abraham into the midst of the fiery furnace, Gabriel said
before the blessed God, <q>Lord of the world, I will go down and
cool the flame, and deliver the righteous One from the furnace
of fire.</q> The blessed God said to him, <q>I am the ONE in
this world, and he is the one in his world. It becomes the ONE
to deliver the one.</q> But as the blessed God deprives no one
of his reward, He said, <q>Thou shalt be deemed worthy to
deliver three of his posterity.</q> Rabbi Simon, the Shilonite,
taught, <q>In the hour that Nebuchadnezzar, the impious, cast
Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah into the midst of the fiery
furnace, Jorkemo, the prince of hail, stood up before the blessed
God, and said, <q>I will go down and cool the flame, and deliver
the righteous ones from the furnace of fire.</q> To him said
Gabriel, <q>The power of the blessed One is not so, since thou
art the prince of hail, and everyone knows that waters quench
fire; but I, the prince of fire, will go down and cool inwardly,
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
and heat outwardly, and I will make a wonder within a wonder.</q></q>
To him said the blessed God, <q>Go down.</q> In the
same hour Gabriel began and said, <q>And the truth of the Lord
<emph>endureth</emph> for ever</q> (Ps. cxvii. 2).
</p>

<p>
Israelites are forbidden to pray in the Syriac language, as
the angels do not understand it, and consequently cannot carry
their petitions to God. Gabriel, however, is acquainted with it,
as he taught Joseph the seventy languages. The chief of all the
angels is said to be the Metatron, who once received fiery blows
from another angel called Ampiel. With regard to heaven, the
Rabbis teach that Egypt is four hundred miles long and broad,
the Morians' land is sixty times larger than Egypt, and the
world is sixty times larger than the Morians' land; heaven
is sixty times larger than the world, and hell is sixty times
larger than heaven. It follows that the <q>whole world is but
a pot-lid to hell.</q> Yet some say that hell is immeasurable, and
some say heaven is immeasurable. It was a pearl amongst
the sayings of a Rabbi. <q>Heaven is not like this world, for in
it there is neither eating, nor drinking, nor marriage, nor increasing,
nor trafficking, nor hate, nor envy, nor heart-burnings;
but the just shall sit with their crowns on their heads,
and enjoy the splendors of the Shechinah.</q>
</p>

<p>
Hell is said to have three doors,&mdash;one in the wilderness, one
in the sea, and one in Jerusalem. In the wilderness, as it
is written, <q>They, and all that appertained to them, went down
alive into the pit</q> (Num. xvi. 33). In the sea, as it is written,
<q>Out of the belly of hell cried I, and thou heardest my voice</q>
(Jonah ii. 3). In Jerusalem, as it is written, <q>Saith the Lord
whose fire is in Zion, and His furnace in Jerusalem</q> (Is. xxxi.
9). The school of Rabbi Ishmael teaches that the <q>fire in
Zion</q> is hell and <q>His furnace in Jerusalem</q> is the gate of
hell. It is also taught that the fire of hell has no power over
the sinners in Israel, and that the fire of hell has no power over
the disciples of the wise. It is again, however, stated that the
Israelites who sin with their bodies, and the Gentiles who
sin with their bodies, go to hell, and are punished there twelve
months. After their body is wasted, and their soul is burned,
the wind scatters them beneath the soles of the righteous, as it
is said, <q>And ye shall tread down the wicked: for they shall
be ashes under the soles of your feet</q> (Mal. iv. 3). Heretics&mdash;deniers
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
of the resurrection&mdash;Epicureans, and other sinners,
shall be perpetually tormented <q>where their worm dieth
not and their fire is not quenched.</q>
</p>

<p>
The doctrine of the resurrection is clearly taught in the Talmud.
As for the last judgment, the following story is told:
<q>Said Antoninus to Rabbi, The body and soul can free themselves
from judgment. How? The body can say, The soul
sinned from the time it separated from me, while I lay as a
stone in the grave. And the soul can say, The body sinned
from the time it separated from me, while I flew in the air as a
bird.</q> He replied, <q>I will give you an example to which it
is like. It is like a king of flesh and blood, who has a beautiful
garden, and in which are pleasant fruits, and he placed two
watchmen therein, of whom one was lame and the other was
blind. Said the lame to the blind, <q>I see pleasant fruits in the
garden; come, and let me sit upon thee, and let us go and eat.</q></q>
The lame sat upon the blind, and they went and ate. After
some days the lord of the garden came, and said, <q>Where are
my pleasant fruits?</q> The lame said, <q>I have no legs to go to
them.</q> The blind said, <q>I have no eyes to see them.</q> What
did he do? He set the lame upon the blind, and judged them
as one. So the blessed God will return the soul into the body,
and judge them as one, as it is said, <q>He shall call to the
heavens from above and to the earth, that he may judge his
people</q> (Ps. iv. 4). He shall call to the heavens from above,
that is the soul; and to the earth that he may judge his people,
that is, the body. After the resurrection men will live without
work or weariness of body, their houses shall be of precious
stones, and their beds of silk, and the rivers shall run with wine
and perfumed oil.
</p>

<p>
The Talmud often contradicts Holy Scripture. It says that
they are in error who believe the Bible account of the sons of
Reuben, of the sons of Eli, and of the sons of Samuel. It
allows usury, and the passing of children through the fire to
Moloch. It permits deceit, and supports it with the text,
<q>With the pure thou wilt show thyself pure, and with the
froward thou wilt show thyself unsavory</q> (2 Sam. xxii. 27).
The Rabbis teach hatred of Christians and Gentiles. Instead
of saying, <q>In the presence of the king,</q> they are taught to
say, <q>In the presence of the dog.</q> A Jew who bears witness
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
against another Jew before a Gentile is publicly cursed. A
Jew is also released from any oath he may swear to a Gentile.
It is only permitted a Jewish physician to heal Gentiles for the
sake of the fee, or for the practice of medicine, but it is not
allowed to save their lives in seasons of danger. Their marriage
is no marriage; and their butchers' meat is only carrion.
It is wrong to invite them into a Jewish house; and it is not
needful to restore what they have lost. When the ox of a Jew
gores the ox of a Gentile, the Jew is free; but if the ox of a
Gentile gores the ox of a Jew, the Gentile must pay the full
cost. A story is told of a Rabbi who sold a number of palm-trees
to a Gentile, and afterward ordered his servant to cut off
some pieces from them. <q>For,</q> he said, <q>the Gentile knows
their number, but he does not know whether they be thick or
thin.</q>
</p>

<p>
The precepts binding on the sons of Noah are stated to be
seven: to do justice; to bless the name of God; to avoid idolatry;
to flee from fornication and adultery; to abstain from
blood-shedding; not to rob; and not to eat a member of a living
animal. An account is given of the river Sambation, which
flows with stones all the six days of the week, but rests on the
Sabbath day. Examples are also furnished of gluttony and
drunkenness. The paunches of some Rabbis grew so big, that,
when put together, a pair of oxen might go between them.
A story is also related of one Rabbi killing another in a
drunken fit, and then working a miracle which restored him to
life. In the following year he again invited the Rabbi to drink
with him, but he declined, on the ground that <q>miracles are
not wrought every day.</q> Instances are also given of the
anguish of Rabbis in the prospect of death. They express
themselves as being without hope of salvation, and as having
the fear of hell before them.
</p>

<p>
Proverbs everywhere abound in the Talmud, and they are
generally replete with shrewd observation. <q>The world subsists
through the breath of school children. Whosoever transgresses
the words of the Scribes is guilty of death. Whosoever
teaches a statute before his teachers ought to be bitten by
a serpent. There is no likeness between him who has bread in
his basket and him who has none. Rather be the head of foxes
than the tail of lions.</q> This, however, again appears as
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
<q>Rather be the tail of lions than the head of foxes.</q> <q>The
righteous in the city is its splendor, its profit, its glory: when
he is departed, there is also departed the splendor, the profit,
and the glory.</q> <q>Licentiousness in a house is as a worm in a
pumpkin.</q> This reappears as <q>Violence in a house is as a
worm in a pumpkin.</q> <q>Thy friend has an acquaintance, and
the acquaintance of thy friend has also an acquaintance; be
discreet.</q> The unworthy child of a good father is called
<q>vinegar, the son of wine.</q> <q>If the opportunity fails the thief,
he deems himself honest. The cock and owl await together
the morning dawn. Says the cock to the owl, <q>Light profits
me, but how does it profit thee?</q> Youth is a crown of roses,
old age a crown of thorns. Many preach well, but do not
practise well. It is the punishment of liars, that men don't
listen to them when they speak truth. Every man who is
proud is an idolater. To slander is to murder. Whosoever
humbles himself, God exalts him; whosoever exalts himself,
God humbles him. Men see every leprosy except their own.
He who daily looks after his property finds a coin. The post
does not honor the man; but the man the post. Every man is
not so lucky as to have two tables. Not what thou sayest
about thyself, but what thy companions say. The whole and
broken tables of the Law lie in the ark. The salt of money is
almsgiving. He who walks four cubits in the land of Israel
is sure of being a child of the world to come. The plague
lasted seven years, and no man died before his time. Let the
drunkard only go, he will fall of himself. Be rather the one
cursed than the one cursing. The world is like an inn, but the
world to come is the real home. The child loves its mother
more than its father: it fears its father more than its mother.
Repent one day before thy death. If your God is a friend of
the poor, why does He not support them? A wise man answered,
<q>Their case is left in our hands, that we may thereby
acquire merits and forgiveness of sin.</q> The house that does
not open to the poor shall open to the physician. He who visits
the sick takes away one-sixtieth part of their pain. Descend a
step in choosing a wife; mount a step in choosing a friend.
An old woman in a house is a treasure. Whosoever does not
persecute them that persecute him, whosoever takes an offence
in silence, whosoever does good from love, whosoever is cheerful
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
under his sufferings, they are friends of God, and of them
says the Scripture, <q>they shall shine forth as the sun at noonday.</q></q>
R. Phineas, son of Jair, said, <q>Industry brings purity&mdash;purity,
cleanness&mdash;cleanness, holiness&mdash;holiness, humbleness&mdash;humbleness,
fear of sin&mdash;and fear of sin, partaking of
the Holy Ghost.</q>
</p>

<p>
Ideas of God are gathered from the occupations which the
authors of the Talmud assign to him. <q>The day contains
twelve hours. The first three hours the Holy One, blessed be
He, sits and studies the Law. The second three hours He sits
and judges the whole world. When He sees that the world
deserves destruction, He stands up from the throne of judgment,
and sits on the throne of mercy. The third three hours
He sits and feeds all the world, from the horns of the unicorns
to the eggs of the vermin. In the fourth three hours He sits
and plays with leviathan, for it is said, <q>The leviathan, whom
thou hast formed to play therein</q></q> (Ps. civ. 26). Rabbi Eliezer
says, <q>The night has three watches, and at every watch the
Holy One, blessed be He, sits and roars like a lion; for it is
said, <q>The Lord shall roar from on high and utter His voice
from His holy habitation; He shall mightily roar upon His
habitation</q></q> (Jer. xxv. 30). Rabbi Isaac, the son of Samuel,
says in the name of Rav, <q>The night has three watches, and
at every watch the Holy One, blessed be He, sits and roars
like a lion, and says, <q>Woe is me, that I have laid desolate my
house, and burned my sanctuary, and sent my children into
captivity among the nations of the world!</q></q> He is described
as praying, and wearing phylacteries, and as having a special
place for weeping. <q>Before the destruction of the Temple the
Holy One played with leviathan, but since the destruction of
the Temple, He plays with it no more. In the hour that the
Holy One remembers His children who are dwelling with
suffering among the nations, He lets two tears fall into the
Great Ocean, the noise of which is heard from one end of the
world to the other, and this is an earthquake.</q> It is further
said that He <q>braided the hair of Eve,</q> and <q>shaved the
head of Sennacherib.</q> He is represented as keeping school,
and teaching the sages. To this school the devils come, especially
Aschmedai, the king of the devils. In the discussions
that take place, God is said to be sometimes overcome by the
wiser Rabbis.
</p>

<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>

<p>
The question of the Messiah is often brought forward. <q>The
tradition of the school of Elijah is, that the world is to stand
six thousand years, two thousand years confusion, two thousand
years the Law, and two thousand years the days of the
Messiah.</q> It is further said that the time for the coming of
the Messiah is expired. <q>Rav says the appointed times are
long since past.</q> The Jerusalem Talmud relates that <q>it happened
once to a Jew, who was standing ploughing, that his
ox lowed before him. An Arab was passing, and heard its
voice. He said <q>O Jew! O Jew! unyoke thine ox, and loose
thy ploughshare, for the Temple is desolate.</q> It lowed a second
time, and he said, <q>O Jew! O Jew! yoke thine ox and bind thy
ploughshare, for King Messiah is born.</q> The Jew said, <q>What
is His name?</q> He answered <q>Menachem.</q> He asked again,
<q>What is His father's name?</q> He said, <q>Hezekiah.</q> He asked,
<q>From whence is He?</q> He replied, <q>From the royal palace of
Bethlehem Judah.</q> The Jew then went and saw him; but when
he went again, the mother told him <q>that the winds had borne
the child away.</q></q> The Babylon Talmud further states that
<q>Rabbi Joshua, the son of Levi, found Elijah standing at the
door of the cave of Rabbi Simeon ben Yochai, and said to him,
<q>Shall I reach the world to come?</q> He answered, <q>If the
Lord will.</q> Rabbi Joshua, the son of Levi, said, <q>I see two,
but I hear the voice of three.</q> He also asked, <q>When will
Messiah come?</q> Elijah answered, <q>Go and ask Himself.</q>
Rabbi Joshua then said, <q>Where does he sit?</q> <q>At the gate
of Rome.</q> <q>And how is he known?</q> <q>He is sitting among
the poor and sick, and they open their wounds, and bind them
up again all at once: but he opens only one, and then he opens
another, for he thinks, Perhaps I may be wanted, and then I
must not be delayed.</q> Rabbi Joshua went to him, and said,
<q>Peace be upon thee, my Master, and my Lord.</q> He answered,
<q>Peace be upon thee, son of Levi.</q> The Rabbi then asked him,
<q>When will my Lord come?</q> He answered, <q>To-day</q></q> (Ps.
xcv. 7). It is said that <q>the bones of those who reckon the
appointed time of the Messiah must burst asunder.</q> Again,
however, it is said that <q>Elias told Rabbi Judah, the brother of
the pious Rabbi Salah, that the world would not stand less than
eighty-five years of Jubilee, and in the last year of Jubilee
the son of David will come.</q> It is further stated that there
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
are first to be the wars of the Dragon, and of Gog and Magog;
and that God will not renew the earth until seven thousand
years are completed. The Rabbis also say that when the Messiah
comes to fulfil the prophecy of riding upon an ass (Zech.
ix. 9), the ass shall be one of <q>an hundred colors.</q> As for the
return of the ten tribes to their own land, the Talmud in some
places asserts it, and in some places denies it. But it is said
that in the days of the Messiah all the Gentiles shall become
proselytes to the Jewish faith. The Rabbis are divided as to
the continuance of the Messiah; some say forty years, some
seventy years, some three generations, and some say that He
will continue as long as from the creation of the world or the
time of Noah <q>up to the present time.</q> Others say that the
kingdom of the Messiah will endure for thousands of years,
as <q>when there is a good government it is not quickly dissolved.</q>
It is also said that He shall die, and His kingdom descend
to His son and grandson. In proof of this opinion
Isaiah xlii. 4 is quoted: <q>He shall not fail, nor be discouraged,
till He have set judgment in the earth.</q> The lives of men will
be prolonged for centuries: <q>He will swallow up death in
victory</q> (Is. xxv. 8); and <q>the child shall die an hundred
years old</q> (Is. lxv. 20). The Talmud applies the former verse
to Israel, the latter verse to the Gentiles. The men of that
time will be two hundred ells high. This is said to be proved
by the word <q>upright</q> (Lev. xxvi. 13), <q>upright</q> being
applied to the supposed height of man before the fall. <q>Moreover
the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun; and
the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven
days</q> (Is. xxx. 26). The land of Israel will produce cakes
and clothes of the finest wool. The wheat will grow on Lebanon
as high as palm-trees; and a wind will be sent from God
to reduce it to fine flour for the support of those who gather
it; as it is said <q>with the fat of kidneys of wheat</q> (Deut.
xxxii. 14). Each kidney will be as large as <q>the kidneys of
the fattest oxen.</q> To prove that this is nothing wonderful,
an account is given of a rape seed in which a fox once brought
forth young. These young ones were weighed, and found to
be as heavy as sixty pounds of Cyprus weight. Lest these
statements should be thought a contradiction of the verse
<q><emph>There</emph> is no new <emph>thing</emph> under the sun</q> (Eccles. i. 9), the
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
Rabbis say that it is just like the growth of mushrooms, toadstools,
and the delicate mosses on the branches of trees. Grapes
will also grow most luxuriantly; and in every cluster there
will be thirty jars of wine. Jerusalem will be built three miles
high; as it is written, <q>It shall be lifted up</q> (Zech. xiv. 10).
The gates of the city will be made of pearls and precious stones,
thirty ells high and thirty ells broad. A disciple of the Rabbis
once doubted whether precious stones could be found so large;
and shortly afterward, he saw an angel with similar stones, as
he was out at sea. On his return to land he related what he
had seen to Rabbi Jochanan. Whereupon the Rabbi said,
<q>Thou fool, if thou hadst not seen, thou hadst not believed;
thou mockest the words of the wise.</q> He then <q>lifted up his
eyes upon him, and he was made an heap of bones.</q>
</p>

<p>
Said R. Samuel, the son of Nachman, R. Jochanan said,
<q>Three shall be called by the name of the Holy One; blessed
be He.</q> And these are the Righteous, the Messiah, and Jerusalem.
The Righteous, as is said (Is. xliii. 7). The
Messiah, as it is written (Jer. xxiii. 6): <q>And this is
His name whereby he shall be called, THE LORD OUR
RIGHTEOUSNESS.</q> Jerusalem, as it is written (Ezek.
xlviii. 35): <q>It was round about eighteen thousand measures:
and the name of the city from that day shall be The LORD is
THERE.</q>
</p>

<p>
In the later editions of the Talmud the allusions to Christ
and Christianity are few and cautious, compared with the
earlier or unexpurgated copies. The last of these was published
at Amsterdam in 1645. In them our Lord and Saviour
is <q>that one,</q> <q>such an one,</q> <q>a fool,</q> <q>the leper,</q> <q>the
deceiver of Israel,</q> etc. Efforts are made to prove that He is
the son of Joseph Pandira before his marriage with Mary. His
miracles are attributed to sorcery, the secret of which He
brought in a slit in His flesh out of Egypt. His teacher is
said to have been Joshua, the son of Perachiah. This Joshua
is said to have afterward excommunicated him to the blast of
400 rams' horns, though he must have lived seventy years before
His time. Forty days before the death of Jesus a witness
was summoned by public proclamation to attest His innocence,
but none appeared. He is said to have been first stoned, and
then hanged on the eve of the Passover. His disciples are
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
called heretics, and opprobrious names. They are accused of
immoral practices; and the New Testament is called a sinful
book. The references to these subjects manifest the most
bitter aversion and hatred.
</p>

<p>
The Rabbis have laid down thirteen rules for the interpretation
of the Talmud. These rules form their system of logic.
They are as follows:
</p>

<p>
(1.) <q>Light and heavy,</q> an argument from the less to the
greater. An example is furnished in the case of Miriam (Num.
xii. 14). <q>If her father had but spit in her face, should she
not be ashamed seven days? let her be shut out from the camp
seven days, and after that let her be received in again.</q> The
argument is here drawn from the conduct of man, the less, to
that of God, the greater. The owner of an ox is also fined
more for his beast if it gores his neighbor's beast than if it eats
his neighbor's corn; since the tooth only means sustenance for
the stomach, but the horn means mischief.
</p>

<p>
(2.) <q>Equality,</q> an argument from the similarity or identity
of words and impressions. An example is furnished in
Deut. xv. 12: <q>If thy brother, an Hebrew man, or an Hebrew
woman, be sold unto thee, and serve thee six years, then in the
seventh year thou shalt let him free from thee.</q> In the 18th
verse, when this law is again referred to, the man only is
mentioned; but as the woman was mentioned in the former
verse, it is concluded that the law applies equally to both.
</p>

<p>
(3.) <q>The building of the father,</q> an argument from the
statements in (a) one place in the Law to other passages, which
are similar. An example is furnished in Exod. xii. 16, where
servile work is forbidden during the feast of unleavened bread,
and the conclusion is drawn that servile work is equally forbidden
in all festivals of the same nature. This mode of argument
is also applied to (b) two places in the Law, where one
place refers to the general proposition, and another to particulars
arising out of it. An example is furnished in Lev.
xv. 1, where a man with an issue is unclean, but in the 4th
verse this uncleanness is limited to his bed and his seat.
</p>

<p>
(4.) <q>Universal and particular.</q> Where there is a general
and a special statement, the special binds the general. An
example is furnished in Lev. i. 2: <q>If any man of you bring
an offering unto the Lord, ye shall bring your offering of the
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
cattle, even of the herd and of the flock.</q> Cattle (in the Hebrew
Behemah) includes both wild and tame. The special
terms <q>herd</q> and <q>flock</q> limit the offering to domesticated
animals.
</p>

<p>
(5.) <q>Particular and universal,</q> or argument from the
special to the general. An example is furnished in Deut. xxii.
1: <q>Thou shalt not see thy brother's ox or his sheep go
astray: thou shalt in any case bring them again unto thy
brother.</q> In the 3d verse, it is further commanded to restore
<q>all lost things of thy brother's.</q> Hence it is concluded, not
only his ox or his sheep, but that everything, which he has lost
is to be restored to him.
</p>

<p>
(6.) <q>Universal, particular and universal.</q> Where there are
two universal statements with a particular statement between,
the particular limits the universals. An example is furnished
in Deut. xiv. 26, where, speaking of the application of the
second tithe, it is said, <q>Thou shalt bestow that money for
whatsoever thy soul lusteth after; for oxen, or for sheep, or
for wine, or for strong drink, or for whatsoever thy soul desireth.</q>
The special limitation, between the two universal
permissions, is to productions of the land of Canaan.
</p>

<p>
(7.) <q>The general that requires the special, and the special
that requires the general.</q> An example is furnished in Lev.
xvii. 13: <q>Whatsoever man ... hunteth and catcheth
any beast or fowl that may be eaten, he shall even pour out the
blood thereof, and cover it with dust.</q> The word <q>cover</q>
or <q>hide</q> is again used in Gen. xviii. 17: <q>Shall I hide from
Abraham that thing which I shall do?</q> The conclusion is
drawn, that cover is restricted to the blood being hidden under
dust, and not put in any vessel. Again (Exod. xiii. 2):
<q>Sanctify unto me all the first-born; whatever openeth the
womb among the children of Israel, both of man and beast,
it is mine.</q> From this verse females might be included with
males. Reference is made to Deut. xv. 19, where it is found
<q>All the firstling males.</q> Still it is obscure, when there are
firstling females, about the males born afterward. Reference
is made to Exod. xxxiv. 19: <q>All that openeth the matrix is
mine.</q> Here all first-born are allowed. This, however, is too
general, and it is again restricted by the word males. And as
this is too general, it is again restricted by <q>all that openeth
the matrix.</q>
</p>

<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>

<p>
(8.) <q>Whatsoever is taught in general and something special
is mentioned&mdash;it is mentioned to strengthen the general rule.</q>
An example is furnished in Lev. xx. 2, where the worship of
Moloch is forbidden, and the penalty for the sin is death. The
conclusion drawn is, that such mention of a special form of
idolatry confirms the prohibition of all idolatry.
</p>

<p>
(9.) <q>When there is a general rule and also an exception&mdash;the
exception lightens and does not aggravate.</q> An example
is furnished in the command (Exod. xxi. 12), <q>He that smiteth
a man so that he die, he shall surely be put to death.</q> The
exception is, <q>Whoso killeth his neighbor ignorantly</q> (Deut.
xix. 4, 5), <q>he can flee to one of the cities of refuge.</q>
</p>

<p>
(10.) <q>When there is a general rule, and an exception not
agreeing with the general rule, the exception both lightens and
aggravates.</q> An example is furnished from the plague of
leprosy (Lev. xiii. 3) when the hair is turned white. The head
and beard are excepted (29th verse) lest there be gray hairs&mdash;this
lightens. But if on the head and beard there be <q>yellow
thin hair,</q> it is a dry scall&mdash;this aggravates.
</p>

<p>
(11.) <q>When there is an exception from a general rule to
establish a new matter&mdash;the new matter cannot be brought
under the general rule again, unless it be mentioned in the
text.</q> An example is furnished from the eating of holy things
(Lev. xxii. 10-13). The priest, any soul bought with his
money, and he that is born in his house, may eat of it. This
is the general rule. If the priest's daughter be married to a
stranger, she may not eat of them. This is the exception. This
exception would have remained if she continued married to a
stranger, or had a child, or had not returned to her father's
house. Therefore a new law is provided, that in the event of
none of these things happening, she may again eat of the holy
things.
</p>

<p>
(12.) <q>Things that teach from the subject, and things that
teach from the end.</q> An example is furnished from the
eighth commandment, <q>Thou shalt not steal.</q> This law, if
applied to man-stealing or kidnapping, implies capital punishment.
The reason given is from its following <q>Thou shalt
do no murder,</q> and <q>Thou shalt not commit adultery</q>&mdash;two
laws which, if violated, entailed death. The second part of
this rule applies to things that teach from the end. What is
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
meant by the end is a matter of dispute. Some say it means
the final cause of logicians. Others say it means something
in the end or conclusion of the law itself. If it be the latter,
an example is furnished from the case of the leprous house
(Lev. xiv. 45): <q>And he shall break down the house, the
stones of it, and the timber thereof, and all the mortar of the
house.</q> These directions teach that houses made of mud are
excepted.
</p>

<p>
(13.) <q>When two texts contradict each other, until a third
be found to decide between them.</q> An example is furnished
in Gen. i. 1: <q>In the beginning God created the heaven and
the earth.</q> It is again written, Gen. ii. 4, <q>In the day that
the Lord made the earth and the heavens.</q> The question now
arises, Which did He make first? The answer is found in
Isaiah xlviii. 13: <q>Mine hand also hath laid the foundation
of the earth, and My right hand hath spanned the heavens.</q>
The conclusion is drawn that He made both at once. Another
instance is the discrepancy in the census of Israel. In 2 Sam.
xxiv. 9, the number stated is eight hundred thousand. In 1
Chron. xxi. 5, the number is said to have been <q>eleven hundred
thousand.</q> The difference of three hundred thousand is
accounted for by referring to 1 Chron. xxvii. 1, where it is said
that twenty-four thousand served the king every month. These
men, when multiplied by the months, make two hundred and
eighty-eight thousand. And the twelve thousand which
waited upon the twelve captains raise the number to three
hundred thousand, the amount required to reconcile the two
statements.
</p>

<p>
In reading the following tracts it should be borne in mind
that the meaning in many places is more implied than expressed.<note place='foot'>The
expression <q>they</q> is often used in the phraseology of the Talmud to
denote either certain officials or else the sages and men of authority. The exact
reference can only be gathered from the context. So again with the use of <q>he.</q>
In such cases the expression <q>he</q> generally refers to the decision on a particular
occasion.</note> Often an idea is taken for granted, which patient
continuance in reading can alone bring to light. The subjects
to which these tracts refer should first be studied in the Bible;
because after such study the restless subtlety of the Rabbis in
<q>binding heavy burdens on men's shoulders</q> can be more
fully discerned. It is desirable to look on these writings from
this point of observation; just as on some mountain top one
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
looks not only at the gold which the morning sun pours on
grass and flower, but also on the deep valley where the shadows
still rest, that one may the more sensibly feel how glorious
the sun is. The whole theory of this second, or Oral Law, has
arisen from inattention to the express statement of Moses:
<q>These words (the ten commandments) the Lord spake unto
all your assembly in the mount out of the midst of the fire, of
the cloud, and of the thick darkness, with a great voice: AND
HE ADDED NO MORE</q> (Deut. v. 22). And it tends to nullify
the declaration of the Targum of Jonathan Ben Uzziel, <q>For
unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given; and he has
taken the law upon himself to keep it</q> (Isaiah ix. 6).
</p>

<p>
In concluding this introduction it is perhaps well to glance
briefly at the age in which the Talmud grew to its present
state. It was a period of great activity and thought. Old
systems of debasing superstition were breaking up and passing
away. A new faith had arisen to regenerate man. The five
centuries which followed the appearing of our Saviour in this
world were filled with religious and political events which
still make their vibrations felt. From the destruction of Jerusalem
and the overthrow of the Jewish polity, an impulse was
given to those political changes which have since gone on without
intermission among the nations of the earth. From the
overthrow of the Jewish Temple an impulse was given to religious
earnestness which, often from wrong, often from right
motives, has increased, and will increase, as the great consummation
draws nigh.
</p>

<p>
While the Rabbis were laboring at their gigantic mental
structure, while generation after generation of their wisest
and most patriotic men were accumulating materials to build
the tower which became a beacon to their countrymen for all
time, the Christian Church was not idle. By their writings
and eloquence the Fathers were gathering the treasures of
patristic lore which have descended to us. While Rabbis were
discoursing in the synagogues of Tiberias and Babylon,
Christian orators were preaching in the basilicas of Constantinople
and Rome. They have all gone from this mortal scene.
But their thoughts are handed down, so that we may converse
with them, though they are no longer on earth. We can hear
their wisdom&mdash;we can see their errors&mdash;we can almost fancy
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
we behold their forms&mdash;so that, being dead, they yet speak.
Since they ceased from their labors empires have risen and
fallen, countless millions of our race have vanished into eternity,
and left their bodies to moulder into dust. But their
teachings still live on, to influence immortal souls for weal or
woe. Doubtless their departures from the Word of God prepared
a way and furnished matter for the numerous heresies
and lawless deeds which form a great portion of the history of
mankind. From their errors sprang at least in part the Koran.
This and kindred themes, however, open up an interminable
vista, leading us away from the Talmud itself. It is better
now to conclude this introduction. And with what more suitable
words can I close than with those drawn from the wisdom
of the Fathers? <q>It is not incumbent upon thee to complete
the work: neither art thou free to cease from it. If thou hast
studied the law, great shall be thy reward; for the Master of
thy work is faithful to pay the reward of thy labor: but know
that the reward of the righteous is in the world to come.</q>
</p>

<p>
[Transcriber's Note: What follows is actually only extracts from the Mishna,
and not the Gemara; as explained above, what is considered the Talmud is
the Mishna and the Gemara together.]
</p>

</div>

<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>On Blessings</head>

<quote rend='display'>
Recitation of the Shemah&mdash;Blessings&mdash;Rabbi Gamaliel&mdash;Exemptions from
the Recitation&mdash;Prayers&mdash;Differences Between the Schools of Shammai
and Hillel&mdash;Reverence for the Temple.
</quote>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I</head>

<p>
1. <q>From what time do we recite the Shemah<note place='foot'><q>Hear, O Israel, the
Lord our God is one Lord,</q> etc. (Deut. vi. 4-9, xi. 13-21; Num. xv. 37-41). Evening
prayer might be said after 12.30 <hi rend='smallcaps'>p.m.</hi> (Acts x.
9.) It is abundantly evident from the Zohar that the ancient Jews understood
that in the Shemah there was a confession of the doctrine of the Trinity in
unity&mdash;three Persons in One God. <q>Hear, O Israel: Jehovah our God is
one Jehovah. By the first name in this sentence, Jehovah, is signified God the
Father, the Head of all things. By the next words, our God, is signified God
the Son, the fountain of all knowledge; and by the second Jehovah, is signified
God the Holy Ghost, proceeding of them both; to all which is added the word
One, to signify that these three are Indivisible. But this mystery shall not be
revealed until the coming of Messiah.</q> The Zohar gives also an imperfect illustration
of this great Truth, by saying that the Trinity in unity is like <q>the human voice,
which is composed of three elements&mdash;warmth, air, and vapor.</q></note> in the
evening?</q> <q>From the hour the priests<note place='foot'>Priests who were legally
unclean. (Lev. xxii. 7.)</note> enter (the temple)
to eat their heave offerings, until the end of the first watch.</q><note place='foot'>The
Mishna begins the night at 6 <hi rend='smallcaps'>p.m.</hi>, and divides it into three
watches of four hours each.</note>
The words of R. Eleazar; but the Sages say <q>until midnight.</q>
Rabban Gamaliel says, <q>until the pillar of the morn ascend.</q>
It happened that his sons came from a banquet. They said
to him, <q>we have not yet said the Shemah.</q> He said to them,
<q>if the pillar of the morn be not yet ascended, you are bound
to say it; and not only this, but all that the Sages say, <q>till
midnight,</q> they command till the pillar of the morn ascend.</q>
The burning of the fat and members they command <q>till the
pillar of the morn ascend.</q> And all offerings, which must be
eaten the same day, they command <q>till the pillar of the morn
ascend.</q> If so, why do the Sages say <q>until midnight</q>?
<q>To withhold man from transgression.</q>
</p>

<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>

<p>
2. <q>From what time do we recite the Shemah in the morning?</q>
When one can discern betwixt <q>blue and white.</q> R.
Eleazar says <q>betwixt blue and leek green.</q> And it may be
finished <q>until the sun shine forth.</q> R. Joshua says <q>until
the third hour.</q><note place='foot'>The Mishna begins the day at 6
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.m.</hi> The third hour is 9 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.m.</hi></note>
For such is the way of royal princes to
rise at the third hour. He who recites Shemah afterward
loses nothing. He is like a man reading the Law.
</p>

<p>
3. The school of Shammai say that in the evening all men
are to recline when they recite the Shemah; and in the morning
they are to stand up; for it is said, <q>when thou liest down
and when thou risest up.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. vi. 7.</note>
But the school of Hillel say, that
every man is to recite it in his own way; for it is said, <q>when
thou walkest by the way.</q><note place='foot'>Ibid.</note> If
so, why is it said, <q>when thou
liest down and when thou risest up</q>? <q>When mankind
usually lie down, and when mankind usually rise up.</q> R. Tarphon
said, <q>I came on the road, and reclined to recite the
Shemah according to the words of the school of Shammai,
and I was in danger of robbers.</q> The Sages said to him,
<q>thou wast guilty against thyself, because thou didst transgress
the words of the school of Hillel.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. In the morning two blessings are said before (the
Shemah), and one after it; and in the evening two blessings
before and two after it, one long and one short.<note place='foot'>A long
blessing begins and ends with <q>Blessed art Thou, O Lord</q>; a
short blessing only ends with these words.</note> Where the
(Sages) have said to lengthen, none is allowed to shorten; and
to shorten none is allowed to lengthen: to close, none is allowed
not to close; not to close, none is allowed to close.
</p>

<p>
5. We commemorate the departure from Egypt at night;
said R. Eleazar, son of Azariah, <q>truly I am a son of seventy
years, and was not clear that thou shouldst say the departure
from Egypt at night until the son of Zoma expounded, <q>that
thou mayest remember the day when thou camest forth out
of the land of Egypt all the days of thy life;</q><note place='foot'>Deut.
xvi. 3.</note> the days of thy
life (are) days; all the days of thy life (include) the nights.</q>
But the Sages say, <q>the days of thy life (are) this world; all
the days of thy life (include) the days of the Messiah.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II</head>

<p>
1. <q>If one who is reading in the Law when the time comes
for praying intends it in his heart?</q> <q>He is free.</q> <q>But if
not?</q> <q>He is not free.</q> <q>At the end of the sections one
salutes out of respect, and responds; but in the middle of a
section he salutes from fear, and responds.</q> Such are the words
of R. Mair. R. Judah says, <q>in the middle he salutes from
fear, and responds out of respect; at the end he salutes out of
respect, and repeats peace to every man.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. The intervals of the sections are between the first blessing
and the second&mdash;between the second and <q>Hear, O Israel;</q>
between <q>Hear</q> and <q>it shall come to pass;</q><note place='foot'>Deut.
xi. 13-21.</note> between <q>and it shall come to pass</q>
and <q>and he said;</q><note place='foot'>Num. xv. 37-41.</note> between <q>and
he said</q> and <q>it is true and certain.</q><note place='foot'>Because in Jer. x. 10
it is written, <q>But the Lord is the true God,</q> etc.</note> Said R. Judah, <q>between
<q>and he said</q> and <q>it is true and certain,</q> none is to
pause.</q> R. Joshua, the son of Korcha, said, <q>Why does the
(section) <q>Hear,</q> etc., precede <q>and it shall come to pass</q>?
<q>That one may take on himself the kingdom of heaven, before
he take on himself the yoke of the commandments.</q> Why
does (the section) <q>and it shall come to pass</q> precede <q>and
he said</q>? Because <q>and it shall come to pass</q> may be practised
by day and by night;<note place='foot'>Deut. xi. 19.</note>
but <q>and he said,</q> etc., only by day.</q><note place='foot'>Because it says,
<q>that ye may look upon it,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the fringe. Num. xv.
39.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. He who recites the Shemah so as not to be audible to
his own ears, is legally free.<note place='foot'>When the expressions <q>free</q> or
<q>not free</q> are used, they refer to the decisions of the Levitical Law. So also
is it with the expressions <q>clean</q> or <q>unclean.</q></note>
R. José says <q>he is not legally
free.</q> <q>If he has said it without grammar and pronunciation?</q>
R. José says <q>he is legally free.</q> R. Judah says <q>he
is not legally free.</q> <q>If he said it irregularly?</q> <q>He is not
legally free.</q> <q>In recitation he mistook?</q> <q>He must recommence
from the place where he mistook.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. Laborers may recite the Shemah on the top of a tree,
or of a wall, but they are not allowed to do so with the
prayer.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, the eighteen blessings called
<q>Amidah.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
5. A bridegroom is exempted from reciting the Shemah
on the first night of marriage, and, even until the expiration
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
of the Sabbath if the marriage be not complete. It happened
that Rabban Gamaliel recited on the first night. His disciples
said to him, <q>hast thou not taught us, our master, that a bridegroom
is exempted from reciting Shemah on the first night?</q>
He said to them, <q>I will not hear you, to deprive myself of
the yoke of the kingdom of heaven even one hour.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. He (R. Gamaliel) bathed on the first night of his wife's
death. His disciples said to him, <q>hast thou not taught us,
our master, that a mourner is forbidden to bathe?</q> He said
to them, <q>I am not like all other men; I am infirm.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. When his slave Tabbi died, he received visits of condolence.
His disciples said to him, <q>hast thou not taught us,
our master, that visits of condolence are not to be received
for slaves?</q> He said to them, <q>my slave Tabbi was not like
all other slaves, he was upright.</q>
</p>

<p>
8. The bridegroom who wishes to recite the Shemah on
the first night may recite it. R. Simeon, the son of Gamaliel,
said, <q>not every one who wishes to affect the pious reputation
can affect it.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III</head>

<p>
1. He whose dead lies before him is exempted from reciting
the Shemah,&mdash;from the prayer,&mdash;and from the
phylacteries.<note place='foot'>Phylacteries consist of texts of
Scripture (Exod. xiii. 2-10, 11-17; Deut. vi. 4-9, 13-22) written on parchment and
inclosed in a leather box. They are bound by thongs round the left arm
and forehead.</note> Those who carry the bier, and those who relieve them, and
those who relieve the relief,&mdash;those who go before the bier,
and those who follow it, who are required for the bier, are
exempted from reciting the Shemah. But those not required
for the bier are bound to recite it. Both (parties) are exempted
from the prayer.
</p>

<p>
2. When they have buried the dead, and return, if they
have time to begin and end (the Shemah) before they reach
the rows (of mourners), they must begin: if not, they must not
begin. Of those standing in the rows the inner (mourners)
are exempt, but the outer ones are bound to recite the Shemah.
</p>

<p>
3. Women, slaves, and children, are exempt from reciting
the Shemah, and also from the phylacteries; but they are
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
bound in the prayer, the sign on the door-post, and the blessing
after food.
</p>

<p>
4. A man in his legal uncleanness is to meditate in his
heart on the (Shemah), but he is not to bless before, or after
it. After his food he blesses, but not before it. R. Judah
says <q>he blesses both before and after it.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. If one stand in prayer, and recollect that he is in his uncleanness,
he is not to pause, but to shorten (the prayer). If
he has gone down into the water (to bathe),<note place='foot'>Lev. xv.
16.</note> and can go up,
dress, and recite the Shemah before the sun shines forth, he
is to go up, dress, and recite it. But he is not to cover himself
with foul water or with water holding matter in solution unless
he has poured clean water to it. <q>How far is he to keep
from foul water, or excrement?</q> <q>Four cubits.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. A man in his uncleanness with a running issue, a woman
in her uncleanness, during separation, and she who perceives
the need of separation, require the bath. But R. Judah <q>exempts
them.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV</head>

<p>
1. The morning prayer may be said till noon. R. Judah
says <q>until the fourth hour.</q> The afternoon prayer until
the evening. R. Judah says <q>until half the afternoon.</q> The
evening prayer has no limit, and the additional prayers may
be said all day. R. Judah says <q>until the seventh hour.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. R. Nechooniah, son of Hakanah, used to pray when he
entered the lecture-room, and when he went out he said a
short prayer. The (Sages) said to him, <q>what occasion is
there for this prayer?</q> He said to them, <q>when I enter I
pray that no cause of offence may arise through me; and when
I go out I give thanks for my lot.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. Rabban Gamaliel said, <q>one must daily say the eighteen
prayers.</q> R. Joshua said <q>a summary of the eighteen.</q> R.
Akivah said, <q>if his prayer be fluent in his mouth, he says the
eighteen; if not, a summary of the eighteen.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. R. Eleazar said, <q>if one make his prayer fixed, his
prayer is not supplications.</q> R. Joshua said, <q>if a man travel
in dangerous places, let him use this short prayer: <q>Save, O
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
Lord, thy people, the remnant of Israel; at every stage of their
journey<note place='foot'>Or transgression.</note>
let their wants be before thee. Blessed art thou, O
Lord, who hearest prayers.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
5. If one ride on an ass, he must dismount: if he cannot
dismount, he must turn his face; and if he cannot turn his face,
he must direct his heart toward the Holy of Holies.
</p>

<p>
6. If one be seated in a ship, or in a carriage, or on a raft,
he must direct his mind toward the Holy of Holies.
</p>

<p>
7. R. Eleazar, the son of Azariah, said <q>the additional<note place='foot'>Called
Musaph.</note> prayers are only to be said in a public congregation.</q> But
the Sages say, <q>if there be a public congregation, or no public
congregation.</q> R. Judah said in his name, <q>in every
place, where there is a public congregation, individuals are
exempted from additional prayers.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V</head>

<p>
1. Men should not stand up to pray, except with reverential
head. The pious of ancient days used to pause one
hour before they began to pray, that they might direct their
hearts to God. Though the king salute, one must not respond;
and though a serpent wind itself round his heel, one
must not pause.
</p>

<p>
2. Men should mention the heavy rain in praying for the
resurrection of the dead; and entreat for rain in the blessing for
the year, and <q>the distinction between the Sabbath and
weekday</q><note place='foot'>Prayer called <q>Habdelah.</q></note>
is to be said in the prayer <q>who graciously bestows
knowledge.</q><note place='foot'>Called <q>Chonen hada'ath.</q></note>
R. Akivah said, <q>the distinction between the
Sabbath and week-day is to be said in a fourth prayer by itself.</q>
R. Eleazar said, <q>in the thanksgivings.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. He who says, <q>Thy mercies extend to a bird's nest,</q> or,
<q>for goodness be Thy name remembered,</q> or he who says,
<q>we give thanks, we give thanks,</q><note place='foot'>As if
there were two gods.</note> is to be silenced. If a
man pass up to the ark (where the rolls of the Law are kept)
and make a mistake, another must pass up in his stead; nor
may he in such a moment refuse. <q>Where does he begin?</q>
<q>From the beginning of the prayer in which the other made
the mistake.</q>
</p>

<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>

<p>
4. He who passes up to the ark is not to answer <q>Amen</q>
after the priests, lest his attention be distracted. If no other
priest be present but himself, he is not to lift up his hands
(to bless the congregation). But if he be confident that he
can lift up his hands, and then resume, he is at liberty.
</p>

<p>
5. If a man pray, and make a mistake, it is a bad sign for
him. If he be a representative of a congregation, it is a bad
sign for his constituents, for a man's representative is like himself.
They say of R. Hanina, son of Dosa, that when he
prayed for the sick, he used to say, <q>this one will live,</q> or <q>this
one will die.</q> The (Sages) said to him, <q>how do you know?</q>
He said to them, <q>if my prayer be fluent in my mouth, I know
that he is accepted; but if not, I know that he is lost.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI</head>

<p>
1. <q>How do we bless for fruit?</q> <q>For fruit of a tree say,
<q>Who createst the fruit of the wood,</q> excepting the wine. For
wine say, <q>Who createst the fruit of the vine.</q> For fruits of
the earth say, <q>Who createst the fruit of the ground,</q> excepting
the morsel. For the morsel say, <q>Who bringest forth
bread from the earth.</q> For vegetables say, <q>Who createst the
fruit of the ground.</q> R. Judah says, <q>Who createst various
kinds of herbs.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
2. He who blessed the fruits of the tree (thus), <q>Who
createst the fruits of the ground?</q> <q>He is free.</q> And for
the fruits of ground (said), <q>Who createst the fruits of the
wood?</q> <q>He is not free.</q> But, in general, if one say, <q>(Who
createst) everything?</q> <q>He is free.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. For the thing which groweth not from the earth, say,
<q>(Who createst) everything.</q> For vinegar, unripe fruit, and
locusts, say <q>everything.</q> For milk, cheese, and eggs, say
<q>everything.</q> R. Judah says, <q>whatever it be, which had its
origin in a curse, is not to be blessed.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. If a man have before him many kinds of fruits? R.
Judah says, <q>if there be among them of the seven<note place='foot'>Mentioned
Deut. viii. 8. The Jews make a distinction between Biccurim,
the fruits of the soil in their natural state, and Therumoth, the fruits in a
prepared state, such as oil, flour, and wine. The first fruits were always
brought to Jerusalem with great pomp and display. The Talmud says that all
the cities which were of the same course of priests gathered together into one of
the cities which was a priestly station, and they lodged in the streets. In the
morning he who was chief among them said, <q>Arise, let us go up to Zion to
the House of the Lord our God.</q> An ox went before them with gilded horns,
and an olive crown was on his head. This ox was intended for a peace offering
to be eaten by the priests in the court of the sanctuary. The pipe played
before the procession until it approached Jerusalem. When they drew
near to the holy city, the first fruits were <q>crowned</q> and exposed to view
with great ostentation. Then the chief men and the high officers and the treasurers
of the temple came out to meet them and receive them with honor.
And all the workmen in Jerusalem rose up in their shops, and thus they saluted
them: <q>O our brethren, inhabitants of such a city, ye are welcome.</q> The pipe
played before them till they came to the Temple Mount. Everyone, even King
Agrippa himself, took his basket upon his shoulder, and went forward till he
came to the court. Then the Levites sang, <q>I will exalt thee, O Lord, because
thou hast lifted me up, and hast not made my foes to rejoice over me.</q>
(Ps. xxx. 1). While the basket is still on his shoulder, he says, <q>I profess
this day to the Lord my God.</q> And when he repeats the passage, <q>A Syrian
ready to perish was my father</q> (Deut. xxvi. 3-5), he casts the basket down from
his shoulder, and keeps silent while the priest waves it hither and thither at the
southwest corner of the altar. The whole passage of Scripture being then
recited as far as the tenth verse, he places the basket before the altar&mdash;he
worships&mdash;and goes out. The baskets of the rich were of gold or silver. The
baskets of the poor were of peeled willow. These latter, together with their
contents, were presented to the priests in service. The more valuable baskets
were returned to their owners. They used to hang turtle doves and young
pigeons round their baskets, which were adorned with flowers. These were sacrificed
for burnt offerings. The parties who brought the first fruits were
obliged to lodge in Jerusalem all the night after they brought them, and the
next morning they were allowed to return home. The first fruits were forbidden
to be offered before the feast of Pentecost, and after the feast of Dedication.</note>
kinds, he
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
is to bless them.</q> But the Sages say <q>he may bless whichever
of them he pleases.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. <q>If one blessed the wine before food?</q> <q>The blessing
frees the wine after food.</q> <q>If he blessed the titbit before
food?</q> <q>It frees the titbit after food.</q> <q>If he blessed the
bread?</q> <q>It frees the titbit.</q> But the blessing on the titbit
does not free the bread. The school of Shammai say, <q>neither
does it free the cookery.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. <q>If several persons sit down to eat?</q> <q>Each blesses for
himself.</q> <q>But if they recline together?</q> <q>One blesses for
all.</q> <q>If wine come to them during food?</q> <q>Each blesses
for himself.</q> <q>But if after food?</q> <q>One blesses for all.</q> He
also blesses for the incense, even though they have not brought
it till after the repast.
</p>

<p>
7. <q>If they first set salt food before a man and bread with
it?</q> <q>He blesses the salt food, which frees the bread, as the
bread is only an appendage.</q> The rule is, whenever there is
principal and with it appendage,&mdash;the blessing on the principal
frees the appendage.
</p>

<p>
8. <q>If one have eaten figs, grapes, and pomegranates?</q>
<q>He must say after them three blessings.</q> The words of
Rabban Gamaliel. But the Sages say, <q>one blessing&mdash;a
summary of the three.</q> R. Akivah says, <q>if one have eaten
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
boiled (pulse); and it is his meal, he must say after it three
blessings.</q> Whoever drinks water for his thirst, says, <q>By
whose word everything is,</q> etc. R. Tarphon says, <q>Who
createst many souls,</q> etc.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VII</head>

<p>
1. Three men who have eaten together are bound to bless
after food. <q>If a person have eaten of that which is doubtful,
whether it has paid tithe or not; or of first tithe from which
the heave offering has been taken; or of second tithe or consecrated
things, which have been redeemed; also, if the waiter
have eaten the size of an olive; or a Samaritan be of the party?</q>
<q>The blessing must be said.</q> <q>But if one have eaten the
untithed&mdash;or first tithes from which the heave offering has
not been taken&mdash;or consecrated things which are unredeemed;
or if the waiter have eaten less than the size of an olive, or a
stranger be of the party?</q> <q>The blessing is not to be said.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. There is no blessing at food for women, slaves, and children.
What quantity is required for the blessing at food?
The size of an olive. R. Judah says <q>the size of an egg.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. <q>How do we bless at food?</q> <q>If there be three, one
says, <q>Let us bless,</q> etc.; if three and himself, he says, <q>Bless
ye,</q> etc.: if ten, he says, <q>Let us bless our God,</q> etc.; if ten
and himself, he says, <q>Bless ye,</q> etc.; (so) if there be ten or
ten myriads. If there be an hundred, he says, <q>Let us bless
the Lord our God,</q> etc.; if there be an hundred and himself,
he says, <q>Bless ye,</q> etc.: if there be a thousand, he says, <q>Let
us bless the Lord our God, the God of Israel;</q> if there be a
thousand and himself, he says, <q>Bless ye,</q> etc.: if there be a
myriad, he says, <q>Let us bless the Lord our God, the God of
Israel, the God of Hosts, who sitteth between the Cherubim,</q>
etc.; if there be a myriad and himself, he says, <q>Bless ye,</q> etc.
As he pronounces the blessing, so they respond after him,
<q>Blessed be the Lord our God, the God of Israel, the God of
Hosts, who sitteth between the Cherubim, for the food we have
eaten.</q></q> R. José the Galilean says they should bless according
to the number of the assembly; for it is written, <q>Bless ye God
in the congregations; (even) the Lord from the fountain of
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
Israel.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. lxviii. 26.</note>
Said R. Akivah, <q>What do we find in the synagogue?
whether many or few the minister says, <q>Bless ye the
Lord,</q></q> etc. R. Ishmael says, <q>Bless ye the Lord, who is
ever blessed.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. When three have eaten together, they are not permitted
to separate without blessing; nor four or five. But six may
divide into two parties, and so may any number up to ten.
But ten may not separate without blessing, nor any number
less than twenty (who can divide into two parties).
</p>

<p>
5. If two companies have eaten in one house, and some of
each company be able to see some of the other company, they
may join in the blessing; but if not, each company blesses for
itself. <q>They should not bless the wine till it has been mixed
with water.</q> The words of R. Eleazar. But the Sages say
<q>they may bless it unmixed.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VIII</head>

<p>
1. These are the controversies relating to meals between
the schools of Shammai and Hillel. The school of Shammai
say, <q>one must say the blessing of the day, and then bless the
wine;</q> but the school of Hillel say, <q>one must say the blessing
on the wine, and then bless the day.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. The school of Shammai say, <q>men must pour water on
the hands, and then mix the goblet;</q> but the school of Hillel
say, <q>the goblet must be mixed, and then water poured on
the hands.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. The school of Shammai say, <q>one is to wipe his hands
on the napkin, and lay it on the table;</q> but the school of Hillel
say, <q>on the cushion.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. The school of Shammai bless <q>the light, the food, the
spices, and the distinction of the day;</q> but the school of Hillel
bless <q>the light, the spices, the food, and the distinction of the
day.</q> The school of Shammai say, <q>who created the light
of fire;</q> but the school of Hillel say, <q>Creator of the lights of
fire.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. Men must not bless light and spices of idolatrous Gentiles,
nor light and spices of corpses, nor light and spices before
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
an idol. They must not bless the light until they have
enjoyed the light.
</p>

<p>
7. <q>If one have eaten, and forgotten, and not blessed?</q>
The school of Shammai say, <q>he must return to his place
and bless.</q> But the school of Hillel say, <q>he may bless in
the place where he recollects.</q> <q>How long is one obliged to
bless?</q> <q>Until the food in his stomach be digested.</q>
</p>

<p>
8. <q>If wine came to the company, and there is but one
goblet?</q> The school of Shammai say <q>that one must bless
the wine and then bless the food.</q> But the school of Hillel
say <q>that one must bless the food and then bless the wine.</q>
Men must answer <q>Amen</q> when an Israelite blesses; but
they must not answer <q>Amen</q> when a Samaritan blesses,
until the whole<note place='foot'>Lest it be a blessing used on
Mount Gerizim.</note> blessing be heard.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IX</head>

<p>
1. He who sees a place where signs were wrought for Israel,
says, <q>Blessed be He who wrought signs for our fathers in
this place;</q> a place where idolatry has been rooted out,&mdash;says,
<q>Blessed be He who hath rooted idolatry out of our
land.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. On comets, earthquakes, lightnings, thunder, and tempests,
say, <q>Blessed be He whose strength and might fill the
world.</q> On mountains, hills, seas, rivers, and deserts, say,
<q>Blessed be He who made the creation.</q> R. Judah says,
when a man sees the great sea he is to say, <q>Blessed be He
who made the great sea,</q>&mdash;when he sees it at intervals. On
rains, and on good news say, <q>Blessed be He who is good and
beneficent.</q> On bad news say, <q>Blessed be the true Judge.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. He who has built a new house, or bought new furniture,
says, <q>Blessed be He who has kept us alive,</q> etc. One must
bless for evil the source of good; and for good the source of
evil. <q>He who supplicates for what is past?</q> <q>Such prayer
is vain.</q> <q>How?</q> His wife is pregnant, and he says, <q>God
grant that my wife may bring forth a male child.</q> Such prayer
is vain. Or if one on the road hear the voice of lamentation in
the city, and say, <q>God grant that it may not be my son, my
house,</q> etc., such prayer is vain.
</p>

<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>

<p>
4. Whoever enters a fortified town must say two prayers,
one at his entrance, and one at his departure. Ben Azai says,
<q>four, two at his entrance, and two at his departure; he returns
thanks for the past, and supplicates for the future.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. Man is bound to bless God for evil, as he is bound to
bless Him for good. For it is said, <q>And thou shalt love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thy might.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. vi.
5.</note> <q>With all thy heart</q> means, with both
thy inclinations, the evil as well as the good. <q>With all thy
soul</q> means, even should He deprive thee of life; and <q>with all
thy might</q> means with all thy wealth. Another opinion is, that
<q>with all thy might</q> means whatever measure He metes out
unto thee, do thou thank Him with thy entire might. No man
is to be irreverent opposite the eastern gate of the Temple,
for it is opposite the Holy of Holies. No man is to go on the
mountain of the house with his staff, shoes, or purse, nor with
dust on his feet, nor is he to make it a short cut, nor is he to
spit at all. All the seals of the blessings in the sanctuary used
to say, <q>from eternity.</q> But since the Epicureans perversely
taught there is but one world, it was directed that man should
say, <q>from eternity to eternity.</q> It was also directed that every
man should greet his friend in THE NAME, as it is said, <q>And
behold Boaz came from Bethlehem, and said unto the reapers,
The Lord (be) with you: and they answered him, The Lord
bless thee.</q><note place='foot'>Ruth ii. 4.</note>
And it is also said, <q>The Lord <emph>is</emph> with thee,
thou mighty man of valor.</q><note place='foot'>Judges vi.
12.</note> And it is said, <q>Despise not thy
mother when she is old.</q><note place='foot'>Prov. xxiii.
22.</note> And it is also said, <q>(It is) time
for (thee), Lord, to work, for they have made void thy law.</q><note place='foot'>Psalm
cxix. 126.</note> R. Nathan says, <q>They have made void thy law because (it is)
time for (thee), Lord, to work.</q>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>On The Sabbatical Year</head>

<quote rend='display'>
Ploughing&mdash;Gardening&mdash;Dunging&mdash;Removing Stones&mdash;Sowing&mdash;Cutting
Down Trees&mdash;Fruits&mdash;Buying and Selling&mdash;Territory Included in the
Sabbatical Year&mdash;Produce Governed by Its Laws&mdash;Debts and Payments.
</quote>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I</head>

<p>
1. <q>How long do men plough in a field with trees on the
eve of the Sabbatical year?</q><note place='foot'>It has been a subject of dispute
when the Sabbatical year began&mdash;whether in Nisan or Tishri. The weight
of evidence is, however, in favor of the civil New Year's Day, which fell in
Tishri (September).</note> The school of Shammai say,
<q>so long as it is useful for the fruit;</q> but the school of Hillel
say, <q>till Pentecost,</q> and the words of the one are near to the
words of the other.
</p>

<p>
2. <q>What is a field with trees?</q> <q>Three trees to every
fifty cubits square, if they be fit to produce a heap of figs worth
sixty Italian minas;<note place='foot'>An Italian mina perhaps; a denarius.
If so, the heap would be worth about £1 17s. 6d.</note> on
their account men can legally plough
the earth for the whole fifty cubits square around them. Less
than for these they may not legally plough, save the extent
of the gatherer of fruit with his basket outward.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. <q>Whether they be fruitless or fruitful?</q> <q>Men may
regard them as though they were fig-trees.</q> <q>If they be fit
to produce a heap of figs worth sixty Italian minas?</q> <q>On
their account they may legally plough the whole fifty cubits
square around them. Less than for these they may not
plough, save what is absolutely needful.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. <q>One tree produced a heap of figs, and two trees did
not produce it; or two trees produced it, and one did not produce
it?</q> <q>Men may not plough save what is absolutely
needful for them, till they be from three to nine in number.</q>
<q>If they be ten?</q> <q>On their account men may legally plough
around them the whole fifty cubits square; and also from
ten trees and upward, whether they produce or do not produce
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
it.</q> As is said, <q>in earing-time and in harvest thou shalt
rest.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxxiv. 21.</note>
There is no need to say earing-time and harvest in
the Sabbatical year, but earing-time on the eve of the Sabbatical
year, when it is just entering on the Sabbatical year;
and harvest of the Sabbatical year, which is proceeding toward
the close of the Sabbatical year. Rabbi Ishmael said, <q>as the
earing-time (mentioned Exod. xxxiv. 21) is voluntary, so the
harvest is voluntary, except the harvest of the (omer) sheaf.</q><note place='foot'>Lev.
xxiii. 10. The omer or <q>wave sheaf</q> at the Passover, and the two
wave loaves, at Pentecost, were to be made from grain grown in the field during
the Sabbatical year. It was also allowed to till sufficient land to pay
taxes.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. <q>If the three trees belong to three owners?</q> <q>They are
reckoned as one, and on their account they may legally plough
the whole fifty cubits square around them.</q> <q>And how much
space must be between them?</q> Rabban Simon, the son of
Gamaliel, said, <q>that a bullock with his ploughing instruments
may pass.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. <q>If there be ten saplings dispersed in the fifty cubits
square?</q> <q>On their account men may plough the whole fifty
cubits square around them till new year's day.</q> <q>If they be
placed in a row, or rounded like a crown?</q> <q>Men may not
plough save what is absolutely needful for them.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. The saplings and the gourds are reckoned alike in the
fifty cubits square. Rabban Simon, the son of Gamaliel, said,
<q>for every ten cucumbers in the fifty cubits square, men may
plough the fifty cubits square around them till new year's day.</q>
</p>

<p>
8. <q>How long are they called saplings?</q> Rabbi Eleazar,
the son of Azariah, said,<note place='foot'>Lev. xix. 23-25.</note>
<q>till they can be used.</q> R. Joshua
said, <q>till the age of seven years.</q> R. Akiba said, <q>a sapling,
as commonly named.</q> <q>A tree decays and sprouts afresh;
when less than a handbreadth, it is a sapling; when more than
a handbreadth, it is a tree.</q> The words of Rabbi Simon.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II</head>

<p>
1. <q>How long may men plough in a white<note place='foot'>Grain
or corn field.</note> field on the
eve of the Sabbatical year?</q> <q>Till the productiveness ceases;
so long as men usually plough to plant cucumbers and gourds.</q>
Said R. Simon, <q>thou hast put the law in every man's hand.
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
But men may plough in a grain field till the Passover, and
in a field of trees till Pentecost.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. Men may dung and dig among cucumbers and gourds
till new year's day, and they may also do so in a parched-up
field. They may prune them, remove their leaves, cover them
with earth, and fumigate them, till new year's day. R. Simon
said, <q>one may even remove the leaf from the bunch of grapes
in the Sabbatical year.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. Men may remove stones till new year's day. They may
gather the ears, they may break off branches, they may cut
off the withered part till new year's day. R. Joshua said, <q>as
they may break off branches and cut off the withered part of
the fifth year, so also they may do it in the sixth year.</q> Rabbi
Simon said, <q>every time I am permitted to work among the
trees, I am permitted to cut off the withered part.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. Men may smear the saplings, and bind them, and cut
them down, and make sheds for them, and water them, till
new year's day. R. Eleazar, the son of Zadok, said, <q>one may
even water the top of the branch in the Sabbatical year, but
not the root.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. Men may anoint unripe fruits, and puncture<note place='foot'>With
a pointed instrument covered with oil.</note> them, till
new year's day. Unripe fruit of the eve of the Sabbatical year
which is just entering on the Sabbatical year, and unripe fruit
of the Sabbatical year which is proceeding to the close of the
Sabbatical year, they may neither anoint nor puncture. Rabbi
Jehudah said, <q>the place where it is customary to anoint them,
they may not anoint them, because that is work. The place
where it is not customary to anoint them, they may anoint
them.</q> R. Simon <q>permitted it in trees because it is allowable
in the usual culture of the trees.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. Men may not plant trees, make layers, or engraft them,
on the eve of the Sabbatical year, less than thirty days before
new year's day. And if one plant them, or make layers, or
engraft them, they must be rooted out. Rabbi Judah said,
<q>every graft which does not cohere in three days has no more
cohesion.</q> Rabbi José and R. Simon said <q>in two weeks.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. Rice, and millet, and poppy, and simsim,<note place='foot'>Linseed.</note>
which have taken root before new year's day, must be tithed for the past
year, and are allowed for use in the Sabbatical year; otherwise
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
they are forbidden in the Sabbatical year, and must pay tithes
for the following year.
</p>

<p>
8. R. Simon of Shezur said, <q>Egyptian beans which are
sown at first for seed are reckoned like them.</q> R. Simon said,
<q>the large lentils are reckoned like them.</q> R. Eliezer said,
<q>the large lentils which put forth pods before new year's day
are also reckoned like them.</q>
</p>

<p>
9. <q>Onions, not for seed, and Egyptian beans, from which
water is withheld thirty days before new year's day, must pay
tithes for the past year, and they are allowed for use in the
Sabbatical year. Otherwise they are forbidden in the Sabbatical
year, and must be tithed for the coming year, and so also
(the produce) of a rain-field<note place='foot'>Rain-field means a field irrigated
with rain water.</note> from which the water of irrigation
is withheld on two occasions.</q> The words of R. Maier.
But the Sages say <q>three.</q>
</p>

<p>
10. <q>The gourds which stand over for seed?</q> <q>If they
dry up before new year's day and are unfit for human food, it
is lawful to let them remain on the Sabbatical year. Otherwise
it is forbidden to let them stand over on the Sabbatical
year. Their buds are forbidden in the Sabbatical year. But
they may be sprinkled with white dust.</q><note place='foot'>Some suppose
the meaning to be, the permission to sprinkle with water a
<q>white</q> or corn field in which the gourds are growing.</note> The words of R.
Simon. Rabbi Eliezer, the son of Jacob, <q>forbade them.</q>
Men may irrigate rice in the Sabbatical year. Rabbi Simon
said, <q>but they must not cut its leaves.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III</head>

<p>
1. <q>How long may men bring out dung to the heap?</q>
<q>Till the time comes for stopping work.</q> The words of R.
Maier. R. Judah said, <q>till its fertility<note place='foot'>The word translated
<q>fertility</q> means literally <q>sweetness.</q> Some apply
these words to the dung out of which the moisture has <q>dried out,</q>
and it is then only reckoned as earth. Others apply them to the ground which
has lost its fertility (sweetness) for want of rain (Job xxi. 33). The meaning is
that no advantage must be gained from it in the approaching Sabbatical
year.</note> dry out.</q> R. José
said, <q>till it hardens into a lump.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. <q>How much may men manure?</q> <q>As much as three
times three heaps for fifty cubits square of ten times ten ass
panniers, each containing a letech.<note place='foot'>About
thirty-six and one-half gallons.</note> They may increase the
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
panniers, but they must not increase the heaps.</q> Rabbi Simon
said, <q>also the heaps.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. A man may make for his field three times three heaps
to the fifty cubits square. <q>For more than these he must
excavate the earth.</q> The words of R. Simon. But the Sages
<q>forbid it, till he sink the heaps three handbreadths, or till he
raise them three above the earth.</q> A man may keep his
manure in store. Rabbi Maier <q>forbade it till he sink it three
handbreadths, or till he raise it three.</q> If he have only a little,
he may increase it and proceed in his work. Rabbi Eleazar,
the son of Azariah, <q>forbade it till he sink the manure three
handbreadths, or raise it three, or till he place it on a rock.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. <q>He who stables his cattle in his field?</q> <q>He may make
a pen twice fifty cubits square. He may remove three sides
and leave the middle one. It follows that he has a stable four
times fifty cubits square.</q> Rabbi Simon, the son of Gamaliel,
said <q>eight times fifty cubits square.</q> <q>If his whole field
were four times fifty square cubits?</q> <q>He should leave a
little space because of the observant eye, and he may remove
the manure of his cattle from the pen and put it into the middle
of his field, as men usually manure.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. A man may not open a quarry in the beginning of the
Sabbatical year in his field, unless there be already in it three
heaps of stones measuring three cubits by three cubits, and in
height three cubits, counting twenty-seven stones in each heap.
</p>

<p>
6. A fence composed of ten stones each, of weight sufficient
for two men, may be removed. <q>If the fence measure ten
handbreadths?</q> <q>Less than this he may clear off, but he
must leave it a handbreadth high over the ground.</q> These
words only speak of his own field. But from his neighbor's
field he may take away what he pleases. These words speak
of the time when one did not begin the work on the eve of the
Sabbatical year. <q>But if one begin on the eve of the
Sabbatical year?</q> <q>He may take away what he pleases.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. Stones shaken by the plough, or those covered and afterward
exposed, if there be among them two of a burden for
two men, may be removed. He who removes stones from his
field may remove the upper (ones),<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>,
Stones lying on the top of other stones.</note> but he must leave those
touching the earth. And so also from a heap of rubbish, or a
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
heap of stones, one may take away the upper part, but must
leave that which touches<note place='foot'>The removal of stones <q>touching</q>
the earth might loosen it, and become a kind of cultivation.</note>
the earth. If there be beneath them
a rock, or stubble, they may be removed.
</p>

<p>
8. Men must not build terraces on the face of the hills on
the eve of the Sabbatical year, when the rains have ceased,
because that is preparation for the Sabbatical year. But one
may build them in the Sabbatical year, when the rains have
ceased, because that is preparation for the close of the Sabbatical
year. And men must not strengthen them with mortar,
but they may make a slight wall. Every stone which they can
reach<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, From the outside of the boundary
wall, as in like manner his ears of corn might be plucked. An answer to
envious remarks that he was preparing for cultivation (Jer. Tal.).</note>
with their hands and remove, they may remove.
</p>

<p>
9. <q>Shoulder stones may come from every place, and the
contractor may bring them from every place. And these are
shoulder stones, every one which cannot be carried in one
hand.</q> The words of R. Maier. Rabbi José said, <q>shoulder
stones, commonly so named, all that can be carried, two, three,
upon the shoulder.</q>
</p>

<p>
10. He who builds a fence between his own and public property
may sink it down to the rock. <q>What shall he do with
the dust?</q> <q>He may heap it up on the public property, and
benefit it.</q> The words of R. Joshua. R. Akiba said, <q>as we
have no right to injure public property, so we have no right
to benefit it.</q> <q>What shall he do with the dust?</q> <q>He may
heap it up in his own field like manure, and so also when he
digs a well, or a cistern, or a cave.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV</head>

<p>
1. In olden times they used to say a man may gather wood,
stones, and grass in his own (field), just as he may gather that
which is greater out of his neighbor's field. When transgressors
increased, a rule was made that this one should gather
from that one, and that one from this one, without benefit; and
it is unnecessary to say that one could not promise victuals to
those who gathered.
</p>

<p>
2. A field cleared of thorns may be sown in the close of the
Sabbatical year. If it be tilled or manured by cattle, it must
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
not be sown in the close of the Sabbatical year. <q>If a field be
twice ploughed?</q><note place='foot'>Twice ploughed implies the payment
of tribute when the land was under foreign rule. Its cultivation was allowed
for this purpose during the Sabbatical year. So long as a foe could be resisted,
it was not cultivated (1 Mac. vi. 49).</note> The school of Shammai say, <q>its fruit
must not be eaten in the Sabbatical year.</q> But the school of
Hillel say, <q>it may be eaten.</q> The school of Shammai say,
<q>they must not eat its fruit on the Sabbatical year, if (the
owner of it have) benefit therefrom.</q> But the school of Hillel
say, <q>men may eat it whether there be or be not benefit.</q> R.
Judah said, <q>the words are contrary; that which is permitted
by the school of Shammai is restricted by the school of Hillel.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. Men may contract for cultivated fields from Gentiles on
the Sabbatical year, but not from Israelites. And they may
strengthen the hands of the Gentiles on the Sabbatical year,
but not the hands of Israelites. And in saluting Gentiles they
may ask after their peace for the sake of peace.<note place='foot'>Jer. xxix. 7.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. <q>If one thins olive trees?</q> The school of Shammai
say, <q>only cut them down,</q> and the school of Hillel say, <q>one
may root them out</q>; but they both agree that for smoothing
the earth the trees must be cut down. <q>What is meant by
thinning?</q> <q>Removing one or two.</q> <q>What is meant by
smoothing the earth?</q> <q>Removing three trees each by the
side of the other.</q> <q>How is this understood?</q> <q>That one
may root them out not only of his own field, but also when
smoothing down the field of his neighbor.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. <q>He who cleaves olive trees must not fill in the vacuum
with earth; but he may cover it over with stones or stubble.
He who cuts down trunks of sycamore must not fill in the
vacuum with earth, but he may cover it over with stones or
stubble. Men must not cut down a young sycamore in the
Sabbatical year, because that is labor.</q> R. Judah said, <q>if as
it is usually done it is forbidden: but one may allow it to be
ten handbreadths high, or cut it just above the ground.</q> <q>He
who lops off vine tendrils, and cuts reeds?</q> R. José the
Galilean said, <q>he must leave them an handbreadth high.</q>
Rabbi Akiba said, <q>he may cut them as it is usual with an
axe, or sickle, or saw, or with whatever he pleases.</q> <q>A tree
that is split?</q> <q>Men may bind it round in the Sabbatical
year, not that it may cohere, but that its fissure may not extend.</q>
</p>

<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>

<p>
7. <q>From what time may the fruits of trees in the Sabbatical
year be eaten?</q> <q>Unripe fruits, when they are becoming
transparent, may be eaten with a piece of bread in the
field. When they are mellow, they may be gathered into the
house; and so also with all like them.</q> During the remainder
of the seven years their tithes must be paid.
</p>

<p>
8. The sour grapes in which there is juice may be eaten
with a piece of bread in the field. Before they rot they may
be gathered into the house, and so also with all like them.
During the remainder of the seven years their tithes must be
paid.
</p>

<p>
9. <q>Olives from which men have collected the fourth of a
log<note place='foot'>A log held the contents of six eggshells.</note>
of oil to the seah?</q><note place='foot'>A seah held about the third of a
bushel.</note> <q>They may be crushed and eaten
in the field.</q> When men can collect from them half a log,
they may be pounded and used for anointing in the field.
When those have been collected which have attained a third
of their size they may be pounded in the field, and gathered
into the house, and so also with all like them. During the
remainder of the seven years their tithes must be paid. But
for the rest of all fruits of trees, as are their seasons for the
laws of tithes, so are their seasons for the laws of the Sabbatical
year.
</p>

<p>
10. <q>From what time may men not cut trees in the Sabbatical
year?</q> The school of Shammai say, <q>every tree when
it shoots forth.</q> The school of Hillel say, <q>the locust trees
when they put forth their curling tendrils, and the vines when
they form berries, and the olives when they flower. And the
rest of the trees when they shoot forth.</q> But it is permitted
to cut all trees, when they come to the season, for tithes.
<q>How much fruit should be in the olive tree to prevent its
being cut down?</q> <q>A quarter cab.</q> Rabban Gamaliel said,
<q>the whole depends on the size.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V</head>

<p>
1. The Sabbatical year of white figs<note place='foot'>Literally, <q>daughters of the
pit.</q> <q>Adam's apples,</q> (Jer. Tal.). Supposed
to be the fruit which tempted Eve. The decision in the text assumes that the
trees began to bud in the Sabbatical year, and that the fruit would not be
ripe for three years.</note> is the second after
the Sabbatical year, because they produce in three years.
Rabbi Judah said, <q>The Sabbatical year of the Persian figs is
the close of the Sabbatical year, because they produce in two
years.</q> The Sages replied to him, <q>they only said white
figs.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. <q>If one store eschalots in the Sabbatical year?</q> R.
Maier said, <q>there must be not less than two
seahs,<note place='foot'>Twelve cabs.</note> in height
three handbreadths, and over them an handbreadth of dust.</q>
But the Sages say, <q>not less than four cabs, in height an
handbreadth, and an handbreadth of dust over them, and they
must be stored in a place where men tread.</q><note place='foot'>To
prevent their growth.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. <q>Eschalots over which the Sabbatical year has passed?</q>
Rabbi Eleazar said, <q>if the poor have gathered the leaves they
are theirs; but if not, the owner must reckon with the poor.</q>
R. Joshua said, <q>if the poor have gathered the leaves, they
are theirs; but if not, the poor cannot reckon with the
owner.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. <q>Eschalots of the eve of the Sabbatical year which have
entered on the Sabbatical year, and summer onions, and also
dye<note place='foot'><q>Puah, for dyeing red</q>(?).</note>
plants of the best ground?</q> The school of Shammai
say, <q>they are to be rooted out with wooden spades.</q> But
the school of Hillel say, <q>with metal axes.</q> But they both
agree with regard to dye plants on rocky ground, that they
are to be rooted out with metal axes.
</p>

<p>
5. <q>From what time is it allowed to buy eschalots on the
departure of the Sabbatical year?</q> R. Judah said, <q>off
hand</q>; but the Sages say, <q>when the new ones become
plenty.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. These are the implements which the farmer is not permitted
to sell in the Sabbatical year&mdash;the plough with all its
implements, the yoke, the shovel, and the goad. But he may
sell the hand-sickle, and the harvest-sickle, and the wagon,
with all its implements. This is the rule: <q>all implements,
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
the use of which may be misapplied for transgression, are forbidden;
but if they be (partly for things) forbidden and (partly
for things) allowed, they are permitted.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. The potter may sell five oil-jugs, and fifteen wine-jugs,
because it is usual to collect fruits from the free property. And
if one bring more than these, it is allowed, and he may sell
them to idolaters in the land, and to Israelites out of the
land.
</p>

<p>
8. The school of Shammai say, <q>a man must not sell a
ploughing heifer on the Sabbatical year</q>; but the school of
Hillel allow it, <q>because the buyer may slaughter her.</q> He
may sell fruits in the time of sowing, and may lend another
man his measure, even if he know that the other man have a
threshing-floor, and he may change money for him, even if
he know that he have laborers. But if it be openly declared,
all is forbidden.
</p>

<p>
9. A woman may lend to her companion on the Sabbatical
year, even when she is suspicious, a flour-sieve or a grain-sieve,
and a hand-mill and an oven; but she is neither to pick
the wheat nor grind it with her. A woman of a special religious
society may lend to the wife<note place='foot'>This permission has reference to certain
laws with regard to legal cleanness.</note> of an ordinary man a flour-sieve,
or a grain-sieve, and may pick wheat, or grind it, or
sift it, with her. But when she (the wife of an ordinary man)
pours in the water, she (a woman of a special religious society)
must not touch the flour (to knead it) with her, lest she
strengthen the hands of a transgressor. And all these things
were not said save for the sake of peace. And we may
strengthen the hands of idolaters in the Sabbatical year, but
not the hands of Israel; and in salutation we may ask after
their peace, for the sake of peace.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI</head>

<p>
1. Three countries (are included) in the laws of the Sabbatical
year. In all the possessions of those who returned
from Babylon&mdash;from the (border) of the land of Israel and to
Cezib,<note place='foot'>Achzib; Ecdippa, near Acca.</note>
we may not eat cultivated fruit, and we may not cultivate
the ground. And in all the possessions of those who
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
came up from Egypt from Cezib, and to the river of Egypt,
and to the Amana,<note place='foot'>Some consider this to be the Abana:
others read Amnum, and try to identify it with Mount Hor.</note>
we may eat cultivated fruits, but we may
not cultivate the ground. From the river of Egypt, and from
the Amana to the interior, we may eat the fruits and cultivate
the ground.
</p>

<p>
2. Men may labor in that which is separated from the
ground in Syria, but not in that which is attached to the
ground. They may thresh, and shovel, and tread out, and
make sheaves, but they must not reap the grain nor glean the
grapes, nor beat the olives. This is the rule; said Rabbi
Akiba, <q>all things similar to that which is allowed in the land
of Israel, men may do in Syria.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. <q>Onions upon which fell rain and they sprouted?</q> <q>If
the leaves on them be dark, they are forbidden; if green, they
are allowed.</q> Rabbi Chanina, the son of Antigonus, said,
<q>if they can be pulled up by their leaves they are forbidden;
and contrariwise if it happened so in the close of the Sabbatical
year, they are allowed.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. <q>From what time may men buy greens at the close of
the Sabbatical year?</q> <q>From the time that similar young
ones are produced. If the earlier ones are prematurely
ripened, than the later ones are allowed.</q> Rabbi<note place='foot'>Rabbi Judah the
Holy, called only Rabbi by way of eminence.</note> allowed
greens to be bought off-hand at the close of the Sabbatical
year.
</p>

<p>
5. Men must not export oil<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, Defiled oil
of the heave-offering, etc.</note> which is only to be burned, nor
fruits of the Sabbatical year, from the land to lands abroad.
Said Rabbi Simon, <q>I expressly heard that they may be exported
to Syria, but that they must not be exported to lands
abroad.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. Men must not import a heave-offering from abroad into
the land. Said Rabbi Simon, <q>I expressly heard that they
may import it from Syria, but that they must not import it
from lands abroad.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VII</head>

<p>
1. The Sages stated an important rule: <q>In the Sabbatical
year, everything eaten by man and eaten by beast, and a kind
of dye-stuff, and whatever cannot remain in the ground, to
them the laws of the Sabbatical year apply, and to their value
the laws of the Sabbatical year apply. They are to be cleared
off from being private property, and their price is to be cleared
off from being private property.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>,
They become common property, and are to be depastured by cattle (Lev.
xxv. 7).</note> <q>And which are these?</q>
<q>The leaves of the deceitful scallion, and the leaves of mint,
succory, and cresses, and the leek, and the milk-flower.</q><note place='foot'>Perhaps
<q>the star of Bethlehem.</q></note>
<q>And what is eaten by beasts?</q> <q>Thorns and thistles and
a kind of dye-stuff, sprouts of indigo and madder. To them
the laws of the Sabbatical year apply, and to their price the
laws of the Sabbatical year apply. They are to be cleared off
from being private property, and their price is to be cleared
off from being private property.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. And again, the Sages stated another rule: <q>All which
is not eaten by man nor eaten by beasts, and a kind of dye-stuff,
and whatever remains in the ground, to them the laws
of the Sabbatical year apply, and to their price the laws of the
Sabbatical year apply, but they are not to be cleared off from
being private property, nor is their price to be cleared off from
being private property.</q> <q>And which are these?</q> <q>The
root of the deceitful scallion, and the root of the mint, and
scorpion grass,<note place='foot'>A spiral grass growing on the palm
tree(?).</note> and the bulbs of the milk-flower, and the
spikenard, and a kind of dye-stuff, the dye-plant, and the
wormwood,&mdash;to them the laws of the Sabbatical year apply,
and to their price the laws of the Sabbatical year apply. They
are not to be cleared off from being private property, nor is
their price to be cleared off from being private property.</q>
Rabbi Maier said, <q>their prices are to be cleared off from
being private property till New Year's Day.</q> The Sages said
to him, <q>if they are not to be cleared off from being private
property, it is immaterial about their prices.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. <q>The peelings and flower of the pomegranate, the shells
and kernels of nuts?</q> <q>To them the laws of the Sabbatical
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
year apply, and to their prices the laws of the Sabbatical year
apply.</q> The dyer may dye for himself, but he must not dye
for pay, because men must not trade in fruits of the Sabbatical
year, nor in the first-born, nor in heave-offerings, nor in
carcasses, nor in that which is torn, nor in abominations, nor
in creeping things. And one must not buy greens of the field
and sell them in the market. But one may gather them, and
his son may sell them on his account. He may, however, buy
for himself, and he is allowed to sell what is superfluous.
</p>

<p>
<q>He bought a first-born animal for a feast for his son, or
for a holiday, and has no need of it?</q> <q>He is allowed to
sell it.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. <q>Hunters of wild animals&mdash;birds and fishes&mdash;who
chanced to find sorts that are unclean?</q> <q>It is allowed to
sell them.</q> R. Judah said, <q>if a man become possessed of
them in his ordinary way, he may buy and sell them, excepting
that such shall not be his practice.</q> But the Sages <q>disallow
them.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. <q>The shoots of vines and of the locust-trees?</q> <q>To
them the laws of the Sabbatical year apply, and to their prices
the laws of the Sabbatical year apply.</q> They are to be cleared
off from being private property, and their prices are to be
cleared off from being private property. <q>The shoots of the
oak, and the nuts,<note place='foot'>Arabic, Fûstûk. Pistachio
nuts.</note> and the blackberries?</q> <q>To them the laws
of the Sabbatical year apply, and to their prices the laws of
the Sabbatical year apply.</q> <q>They are not to be cleared off
from being private property, and their prices are not to be
cleared off from being private property. But their leaves must
be cleared away to become public property, as they fall down
from their stems.</q><note place='foot'>See
<ref target="talmud_sabbatical_chap_ix_6">Chap. ix.
6</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
6. <q>The rose and the carnation and the balsam and the
chestnut?</q> <q>To them the laws of the Sabbatical year apply,
and to their prices the laws of the Sabbatical year apply.</q> R.
Simon said, <q>there is no Sabbatical year for the balsam, because
it has no fruit.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. <q>A new Sabbatical rose which one steeped in old oil?</q>
<q>One may pick out the rose.</q> <q>But an old rose in new oil?</q>
<q>One is bound to clear it off from being private property.</q>
<q>New locust fruit which one steeped in old wine, and old
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
(fruit) in new (wine)?</q> <q>Men are bound to clear them off
from being private property.</q> This is the rule: everything
which produces taste one is bound to clear off from being private
property, sorts that are different and sorts that are the
same, however little they be. The laws of the Sabbatical year
disallow however little of its own sort, and in different sorts
that which produces taste.<note place='foot'>This refers to the examples already given
of a rose in oil, or locust fruit in wine.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VIII</head>

<p>
1. The Sages stated an important rule for the Sabbatical
year: <q>Of all that is only fit for man's food a plaster may
not be made for man, and it is needless to say for beast. And
of all that is not fit for man's food a plaster may be made for
man, but not for beast.</q> And all that is not fit either for man's
food or beast's food, if one consider it as food for man or food
for beasts, the Sages impose on it the inconveniences of the
laws relating to man and the inconveniences of the laws relating
to beast. If one, however, consider it as wood, it is
reckoned as wood; for example, the savory and the hyssop
and the laurel.
</p>

<p>
2. Produce of the Sabbatical year is given for food, for
drink, and for anointing, to eat the thing which it is usual to
eat, and to anoint with what it is usual to anoint with. One
may not anoint with wine or vinegar. But one may anoint
with oil. And so is it likewise with the heave-offering and
second tithe. The laws of the Sabbatical year are more convenient
for them, because it is permitted to light a candle made
from them.
</p>

<p>
3. Men must not sell the fruits of the Sabbatical year,
neither by measure, nor by weight, nor by count. Neither
may they sell figs by counting, nor greens by weight. The
school of Shammai say, <q>nor in bunches.</q> But the school
of Hillel say, <q>that which it is usual to make in bunches in
the house men may make in bunches in the market; for example,
cresses and the milk-flower.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. If one said to a laborer, <q>Here! take this aisar<note place='foot'>Aisar,
a coin worth 3-1/10 farthings.</note> and
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
gather greens for me to-day?</q> <q>His hire is allowed.</q>
<q>Gather me for it greens to-day?</q> <q>His hire is forbidden.</q>
If one take from the baker a cake for a pundion<note place='foot'>Pundion, a
coin worth 1-1/2d.</note> (saying),
<q>when I will gather greens of the field I will bring them to
you?</q> <q>It is allowed.</q> <q>If one take bread from the baker
in silence?</q> <q>He must not pay him from money of the Sabbatical
year, because men must not pay a debt with money of
the Sabbatical year.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. Men must not give money of the Sabbatical year to a
well-digger, nor to a bath-keeper, nor to a barber, nor to a
skipper, but one may give it to a well-digger for drink, and
to all persons one may give a gratuitous present.
</p>

<p>
6. Men may not dry figs of the Sabbatical year in the usual
place, but one may dry them in a waste place. They must not
tread grapes in a wine-press, but they may tread them in a
kneading-trough. And they must not put olives into the oil-press
with the stone over them, but they may pound them and
put them into a small press. Rabbi Simon said, <q>one may
also grind them in the house of the oil-press and put them into
the small press.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. Men must not boil greens of the Sabbatical year in oil
of the heave-offering, lest they take it for uses that are forbidden.
R. Simon <q>allowed it.</q> And the very last thing (in
a series of exchanges) partakes of the laws of the Sabbatical
year; but the fruit itself (first exchanged) is forbidden.
</p>

<p>
8. Men must not buy servants, ground, or an unclean beast,
with money of the Sabbatical year; but if they buy them, they
must eat<note place='foot'>Of the fruits of the Sabbatical year.</note>
as much as their value. They must not bring for
an offering the two pigeons of one with an issue, or the two
pigeons after childbirth bought with money of the Sabbatical
year. And if they bring them, they must eat<note place='foot'>Of the
fruits of the Sabbatical year.</note> as much as
their value. They must not anoint vessels with oil of the Sabbatical
year. But if they anoint them, they must eat<note place='foot'>Of the
fruits of the Sabbatical year.</note> as much as their value.
</p>

<p>
9. <q>A skin which one anointed with oil of the Sabbatical
year?</q> Rabbi Eleazar said, <q>it must be burned.</q> But the
Sages say, <q>one must eat<note place='foot'>Of the fruits of the
Sabbatical year.</note> as much as its value.</q> The Sages
said before Rabbi Akiba it was a saying of Rabbi Eleazar, <q>a
skin smeared with oil of the Sabbatical year must be burned.</q>
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
He said to them, <q>Hush! I cannot tell you what Rabbi
Eleazar said about it.</q>
</p>

<p>
10. And again, the Sages said in his presence, it was a saying
of Rabbi Eleazar,<note place='foot'>There are various Rabbis of this
name, spelled in different ways, mentioned in the Talmud.</note>
<q>he who eats the bread of Samaritans
is as one who eats swine-flesh.</q> He said to them, <q>Hush! I
cannot tell you what Rabbi Eleazar said about it.</q>
</p>

<p>
11. <q>A bath which was heated with stubble or straw of the
Sabbatical year?</q> <q>It is allowed to wash in it.</q> <q>But if one
confer honor (on the bath)?</q> <q>He should not wash in it.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IX</head>

<p>
1. The rue, and the sorrel with spreading leaves, and the
wild savory, the coriander of the mountains, and the parsley
of the marshes, and the rocket of the desert, are free from
tithes; and they may be bought from all men in the Sabbatical
year, because nothing like them is legally guarded. Rabbi
Judah said, <q>the sprouts of the mustard are allowed, because
transgressors are not suspected for taking them from a
guarded place.</q> Rabbi Simon said, <q>all vegetables that
sprout again are allowed, excepting the sprouts of cabbage,
because there is not their like among the greens of the field.</q>
But the Sages say, <q>whatever sprouts again is forbidden.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. There are three countries to be public property in the
Sabbatical year: Judah and beyond Jordan and Galilee; and
each is divided into three parts: Upper Galilee, Lower Galilee,
and the Vale. From the village of Hananiah and upward,
every part in which the sycamore tree does not grow is Upper
Galilee. And from the village of Hananiah and lower down,
where any sycamore tree grows, is Lower Galilee. And the
neighborhood of Tiberias is the Vale. And in Judah, the
mountains, the plain, and the vale, and the plain of Lydda is
as the plain of the south. And its mountains are as the King's
mountain.<note place='foot'>The king's mountain is perhaps
Mount Ephraim, or the mountain range over the plain of Sharon. It is also
suggested that it might have been the mountains round Kirjathjearim (Abu
Goosh?). It contained Cephar Bish, Cephar Sheclaim, Cephar Dikraia,
etc.</note> From Bethhorn and to the sea is one province.
</p>

<p>
3. <q>And wherefore did the Sages say three countries?</q>
<q>That men might eat during the Sabbatical year in every
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
one of them, till the last fruits be finished in it.</q> R. Simon
said, <q>they did not say three countries, they said only in
Judah.</q> And all the other countries are reckoned as the
King's mountain; and all countries are reckoned the same for
olives and dates.
</p>

<p>
4. Men may eat so long as there is any fruit legally free,
but they must not eat of that which is legally guarded. Rabbi
José <q>allowed it, even when guarded.</q> They may eat fruit
so long as it is found in birds' nests, and such fruit as is twice
produced in each year, but they must not eat of winter fruit.
R. Judah <q>allowed it at all times, if it ripened before the summer
ended.</q>
</p>

<anchor id="talmud_sabbatical_chap_ix_5"/>
<p>
5. <q>If men pressed three sorts of fruit in one barrel?</q> R.
Eliezer said, <q>they may eat of the first.</q> R. Joshua said,
<q>even of the last.</q> Rabban Gamaliel said, <q>everything, the
species of which is finished growing in the field, its species is
to be removed from the barrel.</q><note place='foot'>Others read <q>and
the decision is as his word.</q></note> Rabbi Simon said, <q>all
greens are reckoned as one. They are to be cleared away from
the house.</q> They may eat of the leeks till the teasels have
ceased growing in the valley of Beth-Netopha.
</p>

<anchor id="talmud_sabbatical_chap_ix_6"/>
<p>
6. <q>He who gathers fresh herbs?</q> <q>He may use them
till their sap dry out.</q> <q>And he who binds the dry in bundles?</q>
<q>He may use them till the second rain descends.</q><note place='foot'>The
second or the <q>latter</q> rain (Joel ii. 23), called Malkosh, falls in
spring chiefly during the months of March and April.</note>
<q>The leaves of reeds and the leaves of vines?</q> <q>They may
be used till they fall from their stems.</q> <q>And he who binds
the dry in bundles?</q> <q>He may use them till the second
rain descends.</q> Rabbi Akiba said, <q>they may be used by all
persons till the second rain descends.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. <q>Like to this rule is his case who rented a house to his
neighbor till the rains?</q> <q>This means till the second rain
descends.</q> <q>He who by his vow cannot get assistance from
his neighbor till the rains?</q> <q>This means till the second rain
descends.</q> <q>When may the poor enter into the gardens?</q><note place='foot'>Lev.
xxiii. 22; Deut. xxiv. 19.</note>
<q>When the second rain descends.</q> <q>When may they use
and burn the stubble and straw of the Sabbatical year?</q>
<q>When the second rain descends.</q>
</p>

<p>
8. <q>A man had fruit of the Sabbatical year, and the time
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
came for clearing it out from his house?</q> <q>He may divide
to everyone victuals for three meals; and the poor may eat
the fruit after the clearing of it out, but not the rich.</q> The
words of Rabbi Judah. Rabbi José said, <q>the poor and the
rich are alike, they may eat it after it is cleared out.</q>
</p>

<p>
9. <q>A man had fruits of the Sabbatical year, whether they
fell to him by inheritance, or were given to him by gift?</q>
R. Eliezer said, <q>let them be given to those who may eat
them.</q> But the Sages say, <q>the transgressor must not profit,
but let them be sold to those who may eat them, and let their
price be divided to every man.</q> <q>He who eats dough of the
Sabbatical year before the heave-offering be separated from
it?</q> <q>He is guilty of death.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter X</head>

<p>
1. The Sabbatical year releases<note place='foot'>Deut. xv. 1.</note>
a loan, whether it be with
or without a bill. The credit of a shop is not released. But
if one made it as a loan, it is released. Rabbi Judah said, <q>all
the first credit is released, the wages of an hireling is not released.</q>
<q>But if one made it as a loan?</q> <q>It is released.</q>
Rabbi José said, <q>every work which ceases on the Sabbatical
year is released; but that which does not cease on the Sabbatical
year is not released from payment.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. The butcher who slaughtered a heifer (at the end of the
Sabbatical year), and divided her head (for sale on the first
of the two feast days of the new year), remains a debtor; but
if he did so in an intercalary month,<note place='foot'>This decision
supposes the case of the month Elul having thirty days, and
the last day to be in the Sabbatical year; consequently it would not be one
of the two feast days of the new year, which it should have been if the month
had been the usual lunar month.</note> he is released (Deut. xv.
1). But if it be not an intercalary month, he is not released.
He who forced, or enticed, or uttered a slander, and every act
of the tribunal, have no release. <q>He who lent on security, or
delivered his bills to the tribunal?</q> <q>There is no release for
him.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. The Defence<note place='foot'><q>The defence,</q> called Pruzbul, was
a legal document constituted to encourage loans to the poor, and to protect the
interests of the lender.</note> (for the poor) has no release. This is one
of the things which the old Hillel ruled. When he saw that
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
the people refrained from mutual loans, and transgressed what
is written in the law, <q>Beware that there be not a thought in
thy wicked heart,</q><note place='foot'>Deut. xv. 9.</note>
etc., Hillel ruled the Defence.
</p>

<p>
4. This is the substance of the Defence, <q>I hand over to
you judges such and such men in such a place, that every debt
which belongs to me I may collect, whenever I please.</q> And
the judges or witnesses sealed it below.
</p>

<p>
5. The Defence written before the Sabbatical year is valid,
but afterward it is disallowed. Bills written before the Sabbatical
year are disallowed, but afterward they are valid. He
who borrows from five persons must write a Defence for each
of them. If five persons borrow from one, he writes but one
Defence for all of them.
</p>

<p>
6. Men must not write a Defence save only on ground. <q>If
he have none?</q> <q>The lender may present him with however
little from his own field.</q> <q>If he had a field in pledge in a
city?</q> <q>He may write on it the Defence.</q> Rabbi Huzpith
said, <q>a man may write it on the property of his wife; and for
orphans on the property of their guardians.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. <q>Beehives?</q> R. Eliezer said, <q>they are as ground, and
men may write on them a Defence, and they contract no legal
uncleanness in their proper place, but he who takes honey out
of them on the Sabbath is liable (for a sin-offering). The
Sages, however, say they are not as ground, and men must not
write on them a Defence, and they do contract legal defilement
in their place, and he who takes honey out of them on
the Sabbath is free.</q>
</p>

<p>
8. <q>He who paid his debt on the Sabbatical year?</q> <q>The
lender must say to him, <q>I release thee.</q></q> <q>When he said it
to him?</q> <q>Even so, he may receive it from him, as is said,
and this is the manner of the release.</q><note place='foot'>Deut.
xv. 2.</note> It is like the slayer
who was banished to the city of refuge, and the men of the
city wished to honor him. He must say to them, <q>I am a
murderer.</q> They say to him, <q>Even so.</q> He may receive
the honor from them, as is said, <q>and this is the case of the
slayer.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. xix. 4.</note>
</p>

<p>
9. <q>He who pays a debt in the Sabbatical year?</q> <q>The
spirit of the Sages reposes on him.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>,
They are well pleased with him.</note> <q>He who borrowed
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
from a proselyte, when his children<note place='foot'>Money owing to Jewish proselytes
was generally repaid, but it was not obligatory to pay it to their heirs, as
the persons from whom the proselytes came were no longer in a religious sense
their next of kin.</note> became proselytes with
him?</q> <q>He need not repay his children.</q> <q>But if he repay
them?</q> <q>The spirit of the Sages reposes on him.</q> All
movables become property by acquisition; but everyone who
keeps his word,
</p>

<lg>
<l>THE SPIRIT</l>
<l>OF THE SAGES</l>
<l>REPOSES</l>
<l>ON</l>
<l>HIM.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Note.</hi>&mdash;At the Feast of Tabernacles
in the Sabbatical year, the following portions of Scripture were appointed to
be read: Deut. i. 1-6; vi. 4-8; xi. 13-22; xiv. 22; xv. 23; xvii. 14; xxvi. 12-19;
xxvii.; xxviii. These portions were read by the king or high priest from
a wooden platform erected in the Temple. The king or the high priest usually
read them sitting. King Agrippa, however, read them standing, and when he
came to the words <q>Thou mayst not set a stranger over thee, which is not
thy brother</q> (Deut. xvii. 15), <q>tears dropped from his eyes.</q> The people
then cried out to encourage him, <q>Thou art our brother&mdash;thou art our
brother.</q> (Sotah, vii. 8).
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>On The Sabbath</head>

<quote rend='display'>
Removals&mdash;Work to be Avoided&mdash;Discussion Between the Schools of
Shammai and Hillel as to What Constitutes Work&mdash;Work
Allowed&mdash;Lighting&mdash;Eve
of the Sabbath&mdash;Cooking and Hot Water&mdash;Retention
of Heat&mdash;Burdens&mdash;Ornaments&mdash;Principal and Secondary Work.
</quote>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I</head>

<p>
1. Removals<note place='foot'>From private to public property.</note>
on the Sabbath are two. Of these removals
four are inside a place. And there are two other removals,
of which four are outside a place. <q>How?</q> <q>A beggar
stands without, and the master of the house within. The beggar
reached his hand within, and gave something into the
hand of the master of the house, or took something from it
and brought it out?</q> <q>The beggar is guilty,<note place='foot'>Of
death.</note> and the master
of the house is free.</q> <q>The master of the house reached his
hand outside and gave something into the hand of the beggar,
or took something from it and brought it in?</q> <q>The
master of the house is guilty, but the beggar is free.</q> <q>The
beggar reached his hand within, and the master of the house
took something from it, or gave something into it, and the
beggar brought it out?</q> <q>Both are free.</q> <q>The master of
the house reached his hand without, and the beggar took
something from it, or gave something into it, and the master
brought it in?</q> <q>Both are free.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. A man must not sit before the barber near to evening
prayer,<note place='foot'>On Friday evening.</note>
until he has prayed. He must not enter a bath, nor a
tannery, nor eat, nor judge. <q>But if they began?</q> <q>They
need not cease.</q> They may cease to read the <q>Hear,</q><note place='foot'>Deut.
vi. 4.</note> etc.,
but they must not cease to pray.
</p>

<p>
3. A tailor must not go out with his needle near dusk,<note place='foot'>On Friday
evening.</note> lest he forget and go (afterward). Nor a scribe go out with his
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
pen. Nor may one search his garments. Nor shall one read
at the light of the lamp. In truth they said, <q>the teacher may
overlook when children are reading, but he himself shall not
read.</q> Similar to him, one with an issue shall not eat with her
who has an issue, because of the custom of transgression.
</p>

<p>
4. And these following are from the decisions which they
mentioned of the upper chamber of Hananiah, the son of
Hezekiah, the son of Gorion, when the Sages went up to visit
him. The school of Shammai was counted, and was more
numerous than the school of Hillel. And eighteen matters
were determined on that day.
</p>

<p>
5. The school of Shammai said, <q>they must not soak ink,
nor paints, nor vetches, unless they be sufficiently soaked while
it is yet day.</q> But the school of Hillel allows it.
</p>

<p>
6. The school of Shammai said, <q>they must not put bundles
of flax inside the oven, except it be sufficiently steamed
while it is yet day, nor wool into the boiler except it imbibe
sufficient dye in the eye of day.</q> But the school of Hillel
allow it. The school of Shammai said, <q>they must not spread
nets for beasts, nor birds, nor fishes, except they be netted
while it is yet day.</q> But the school of Hillel allows it.
</p>

<p>
7. The school of Shammai said, <q>they must not sell to a
stranger, and they must not lade his ass with him, and they
must not load on him, except they have sufficient time to reach
a near place before the Sabbath.</q> But the school of Hillel
allows it.
</p>

<p>
8. The school of Shammai said, <q>they must not give skins
to a tanner, nor articles to a strange laundress; except they
can be sufficiently done while it is yet day.</q> But all of them
the school of Hillel allow <q>with the sun.</q>
</p>

<p>
9. Said Rabbi Simon, the son of Gamaliel, <q>the house of
my father used to give white articles to a strange laundress
three days before the Sabbath.</q> But both schools agree that
<q>they may carry<note place='foot'>Though by their weight they continue
to press out oil or wine on the Sabbath.</note> beams to the
oil-press and logs to the wine-press.</q>
</p>

<p>
10. <q>They must not fry flesh, onions, and eggs; except they
be sufficiently fried while it is yet day. They must not put
bread in the oven at dusk, nor a cake on coals, except its face
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
be sufficiently crusted while it is yet day.</q> Rabbi Eliezer said,
<q>that its under side be sufficiently crusted.</q>
</p>

<p>
11. <q>They may hang up the passover<note place='foot'>When the eve of the passover and
the eve of the Sabbath coincided.</note> offering in an oven
at dusk. And they may take a light from the wood pile in the
house of burning.</q><note place='foot'>In the temple. See tract on
<ref target="talmud_measurements_chap_i">Measurements, c. 1</ref>.</note> And in the
suburbs <q>when the fire has sufficiently lighted the greater part.</q> Rabbi Judah
says, <q>from the coals however little</q> (kindled before the Sabbath).
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II</head>

<p>
1. <q>With what may they light (lamps) on the Sabbath?</q>
<q>And with what may they not light?</q> <q>They may not light
with cedar moss, nor with unhackled flax, nor with floss silk,
nor with a wick of willow, nor with a wick of nettles, nor with
weeds from the surface of water, nor with pitch, nor with
wax, nor with castor oil, nor with the defiled oil of heave-offering,
nor with the tail, nor with the fat.</q> Nahum the
Median said, <q>they may light with cooked fat.</q> But the
Sages say, <q>whether cooked or uncooked, they must not light
with it.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. They must not light with the defiled oil of the heave-offering
on a holiday. Rabbi Ishmael said, <q>they must not
light with pitch dregs for the honor of the Sabbath.</q> But the
Sages allow all oils, <q>with sesame oil, with nut oil, with radish
oil, with fish oil, with colocynth oil, with pitch dregs and
naphtha.</q> Rabbi Tarphon said, <q>they must only light with
olive oil.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. <q>They must not light with anything that grows from
wood, except flax. And all that grows from wood does not
contract the uncleanness of tents,<note place='foot'>Num. xix.
18.</note> except flax.</q> <q>A wick of
cloth folded but not singed?</q> Rabbi Eliezer says, <q>it contracts
uncleanness, and they must not light it.</q> Rabbi Akiba
says, <q>it is clean, and they may light it.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. A man must not perforate an eggshell, and fill it with
oil, and put it on the mouth of the lamp, because it drops, even
though it be of pottery. But Rabbi Judah <q>allows it.</q> <q>But
if the potter joined it at first?</q> <q>It is allowed, since it is one
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
vessel.</q> A man must not fill a bowl of oil, and put it by the
side of the lamp, and put the end of the wick into it because it
imbibes. But Rabbi Judah <q>allows it.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. <q>Whoever extinguishes the lamp because he fears the
Gentiles, or robbers, or a bad spirit, or that the sick may sleep?</q>
<q>He is free.</q> <q>He spares the lamp?</q> <q>He spares the oil?</q>
<q>He spares the wick?</q> <q>He is guilty.</q> But Rabbi José
frees in all cases except the wick, because <q>it makes coal.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. For three transgressions women die in the hour of childbirth:
when they neglect times, and the dough offering,<note place='foot'>Num.
xv. 20.</note> and lighting the Sabbath lamp.
</p>

<p>
7. Three things are necessary for a man to say in his house
on the eve of the Sabbath at dusk. <q>Have you taken tithes?</q>
<q>Have you prepared erub?</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>,
Have you so joined houses that are apart that they may be counted as
one on the Sabbath for carrying articles, etc. It is done by persons blessing
a piece of dough which is common property.</note> <q>Light the lamp.</q> <q>It is
doubtful if it be dark or not?</q><note place='foot'>When three stars are seen, it
is dark.</note> <q>They must not tithe that
which is certainly untithed, and they must not baptize vessels,
and they must not light the lamps. But they may take tithes
of the doubtful heave-offering, and prepare erub, and cover up
hot water.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III</head>

<p>
1. <q>A cooking oven which was heated with stubble or
brushwood?</q> <q>They may place on it cookery.</q> <q>With oil-dregs
and with wood?</q> <q>They must not place it, till the coals
are raked out, or ashes put in.</q> The school of Shammai say,
<q>hot water, but not cookery.</q> But the school of Hillel say,
<q>hot water and cookery.</q> The school of Shammai say, <q>they
may take it off, but not place it back.</q> But the school of
Hillel say, <q>they may place it back.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. <q>A cooking stove, which was heated with stubble or
brushwood?</q> <q>They must not place anything either inside
or upon it.</q> <q>A bake oven, which was heated with stubble or
brushwood?</q> <q>It is as a cooking oven.</q> <q>With oil-dregs
or with wood?</q> <q>It is as a cooking stove.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. They must not put an egg beside a boiler, lest it be boiled.
And they must not wrap it in towels. But Rabbi José allows
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
it. And they must not hide it in sand, or in the dust of the
roads, lest it be roasted.
</p>

<p>
4. It happened that the men of Tiberias arranged, and introduced
a pipe of cold water into a canal of the hot springs.
The Sages said to them, <q>if it be Sabbath, it is as if hot waters
were heated on Sabbath, they are forbidden for washing and
drinking. But if on a holiday, as if hot waters were heated on
a holiday, they are forbidden for washing but allowed for
drinking.</q> <q>A skillet with attached brazier?</q> <q>If one rake
out the coals (on Friday evening), persons may drink its hot
waters on Sabbath.</q> <q>A pan with double bottom?</q> <q>Even
though the coals are raked out, they must not drink of it.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. <q>The boiler which is set aside (from the fire)?</q> <q>They
must not put into it cold water to be warmed; but they may
put into it&mdash;or into a cup&mdash;cold water to make it lukewarm.</q>
<q>A saucepan or an earthen pot, which they took off boiling?</q>
<q>They must not put into it spices, but they may put them into
a bowl or into a plate.</q> Rabbi Judah says, <q>they may put them
into all vessels, excepting a thing in which there is vinegar or
fish-brine.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. They must not put vessels under a lamp to catch the oil.
<q>But if they place them, while it is still day?</q> <q>It is allowed.</q>
But they must not use it, because it is not purposely
prepared (for Sabbath use). They may remove a new lamp,
but not an old one. Rabbi Simon says, <q>all lamps may be removed,
except the lamp lighted for the Sabbath.</q> They may
put a vessel under the lamp to catch sparks, but they must
not put water into it, as it quenches.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV</head>

<p>
1. <q>With what may they cover up (pots to retain the
heat)?</q> <q>And with what may they not cover them up?</q>
<q>They may not cover them up with oil-dregs, or dung, or
salt, or lime, or sand either fresh or dry, or straw, or grape-skins,
or woollen, or herbs when they are fresh, but they may
cover up with them when they are dry. They may cover up
with garments, and fruits, with doves' wings, with carpenters'
sawdust, and with tow of fine flax.</q> Rabbi Judah forbids
<q>fine,</q> but allows <q>coarse.</q>
</p>

<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>

<p>
2. They may cover up with hides, and remove them&mdash;with
woollen fleeces, but they must not remove them. <q>How does
one do?</q> <q>He takes off the cover, and they fall down.</q>
Rabbi Eleazar, the son of Azariah, says <q>the vessel is inclined
on its side, and he takes them away.</q> <q>Perhaps he took them
away and cannot return them?</q><note place='foot'>As that would
involve <q>labor.</q></note> But the Sages say <q>he
may take them away, and return them.</q> <q>He does not cover
it, while it is yet day?</q> <q>He must not cover it, when it begins
to be dark.</q> <q>He covered it, and it opened?</q> <q>It is allowed
to cover it again.</q> A man may fill the goblet, and put it under
the pillow or under the bolster (to warm it).
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V</head>

<p>
1. <q>With what is a beast led forth, and with what is it not
led forth?</q><note place='foot'>The point to be decided is the difference
between what is necessary and what is a burden.</note>
One may lead forth the camel with a head-stall,
and the she-camel with a nose-ring, and the Lydda<note place='foot'>Others
think <q>Lybian</q> asses.</note> asses with
a bridle, and a horse with a halter, and all animals that wear a
halter they may lead forth with a halter, and they are held with
a halter, and, if unclean, they may sprinkle water upon them,
and baptize them in their places.
</p>

<p>
2. The ass one may lead forth with a pack-saddle when it
is bound on it. Rams go forth tied up. Ewes go forth with
tails bound back, doubled down, or put in a bag. The goats go
forth bound tightly. Rabbi José <q>forbids all, excepting ewes,
to have their tails in a bag.</q> Rabbi Judah says <q>the goats go
forth bound tightly to dry up their udders, but not to guard
the milk.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. <q>And with what must they not go forth?</q> <q>A camel
must not go forth with a rag bound as a mark to its tail, nor
fettered, nor with fore-foot tied doubled up, and so with the
rest of all beasts; a man must not bind camels one to another,
and lead them, but he may take their ropes into his hand, and
hold them, guarding that they be not twisted.</q><note place='foot'>Through
fear of linen and woollen being mixed. Deut. xxii. 11.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. One must not bring forth an ass with a pack-saddle, when
it is not tied upon him before the Sabbath; nor with a bell,
even though it be muffled, nor with a ladder<note place='foot'>Ladder-shaped
piece of wood to prevent it rubbing its throat if it have a
sore.</note> on its throat, nor
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
with a strap on its leg; nor may cocks and hens be led forth
with twine or straps on their legs. Nor may rams be led forth
with a gocart under their tails, nor ewes with John wood.<note place='foot'>Wood
discovered by one John, which when put into sheep's nostrils, caused
them to sneeze and the maggots to fall off.</note>
And the calf must not be led forth with a muzzle, nor a cow with
the skin of the hedgehog,<note place='foot'>To prevent her being sucked by
reptiles.</note> nor with a strap between her horns.
The cow<note place='foot'>The Gemara says, the cow was his
neighbor's, but as he did not object, the blame was laid on him.</note>
of Rabbi Eleazar, the son of Azariah, used to go
out with a strap between her horns, but not with the will of the
Sages.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI</head>

<p>
1. <q>With what may a woman go out?</q> And <q>with what
may she not go out?</q> <q>A woman may not go out with laces
of wool, nor with laces of flax, nor with straps on her head,
and she cannot baptize herself in them till she unloose them;
nor with frontlets, nor temple fillets, unless sewn to her cap,
nor with a headband, into the public street, nor with a golden
crown in the form of Jerusalem, nor with a necklace, nor with
nose-rings, nor with a ring without a seal, nor with a needle
without an eye; but, if she go out, she is not guilty of a sin-offering.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. A man must not go out with hobnailed sandals,<note place='foot'>Once
a number of Jews took refuge in a cave, and hearing some persons
pass, whom they supposed to be enemies, they fell on each other with their
hobnailed sandals, and beat each other to death.</note> nor with
one sandal when there is no sore on his other foot, nor with
phylacteries, nor with an amulet unless it be of an expert, nor
with a coat of mail, nor with a helmet, nor with greaves; but,
if he go out, he is not guilty of a sin-offering.
</p>

<p>
3. <q>A woman must not go out with an eyed needle, nor
with a signet ring, nor with a spiral head-dress, nor with a
scent-box, nor with a bottle of musk; and if she go out she is
guilty of a sin-offering.</q> The words of Rabbi Meier. But the
Sages <q>absolve the scent-box and the bottle of musk.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. The man must not go out with sword, nor bow, nor shield,
nor sling, nor lance; and if he go out he is guilty of a sin-offering.
Rabbi Eleazar said, <q>they are his ornaments.</q> But
the Sages say, <q>they are only for shame, as is said, <q>And they
shall beat their swords into ploughshares, and their spears
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>
into pruning hooks: nation shall not lift up sword against
nation, neither shall they learn war any more.</q></q><note place='foot'>Isaiah
xi. 4; Micah iv. 3.</note> Garters are
clean, and they may go forth in them on Sabbath. Anklets<note place='foot'>These
anklets were a kind of chain used to prevent members of certain
families in Jerusalem taking too wide strides in walking.</note>
contract uncleanness, and they must not go out in them on Sabbath.
</p>

<p>
5. A woman may go out with plaits of hair whether they
be her own, or her companion's, or a beast's hair, with frontlets
and temple fillets, when they are sewn to her cap, with a headband
or a stranger's curl into the courtyard, with wool in her
ear, and wool in her shoe, and wool prepared for her separation,
with pepper, or with a grain of salt,<note place='foot'>To cure
toothache.</note> or with anything which
she will put inside her mouth, except that she shall not put it
in for the first time on the Sabbath, and if it fall out she must
not put it back. <q>A false tooth or a tooth of gold?</q> Rabbi
<q>allows it.</q> But the Sages <q>forbid it.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. A woman may go out with a coin on a sore foot. Little
girls may go out with plaits and even splinters in their ears.
Arab women go out veiled, and Median women with mantillas;
and so may any one, but, as the Sages have said, <q>according
to their custom.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. A mantilla may be folded over a stone, or a nut, or money,
save only that it be not expressly folded for the Sabbath.
</p>

<p>
8. <q>The cripple may go out on his wooden leg.</q> The words
of Rabbi Meier. But Rabbi José forbids it. <q>But if it have a
place for receiving rags?</q> <q>It is unclean.</q> His crutches
cause uncleanness by treading. But they may go out with them
on the Sabbath, and they may enter with them into the Temple
court. The chair and crutches (of a paralytic) cause uncleanness
by treading, and they must not go out with them
on the Sabbath, and they must not enter with them into the
Temple court. Stilts<note place='foot'>Others translate
<q>masks.</q></note> are clean, but they must not go out with
them.
</p>

<p>
9. The sons may go out with their (father's) girdles. And
sons of kings with little bells; and so may anyone, but,
as the Sages have said, <q>according to their custom.</q>
</p>

<p>
10. <q>They may go out with an egg of a locust,<note place='foot'>To
cure ear-ache.</note> and a tooth
of a fox,<note place='foot'>To cure one who did not sleep
enough they used a tooth of a dead fox. For one who slept too much, they
used a tooth of a living fox.</note> and a nail of one crucified, as
medicine.</q><note place='foot'>To cure ague.</note> The words
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
of Rabbi Meier. But the Sages say (others read the words of
Rabbi José and Rabbi Meier) <q>it is forbidden even on a
week day, because of the ways of the Amorites.</q><note place='foot'>Lev.
xviii. 3.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VII</head>

<p>
1. The Sages laid down a great rule for the Sabbath:
<q>Everyone who forgets the principle of Sabbath, and did
many works on many Sabbaths, is only responsible for one sin-offering.
Everyone who knows the principle of Sabbath, and
did many works on many Sabbaths, is responsible for every
Sabbath. Everyone who knows that there is Sabbath, and did
many works on many Sabbaths, is responsible for every principal
work.<note place='foot'>Works are divided into principal
and secondary, or in Rabbinic language fathers and children. And if a man
does one principal work and twenty secondary works, they regarded them as
one sin, and consequently deserving one punishment.</note>
Everyone who has done many works, springing
from one principal work, is only responsible for one sin-offering.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. The principal works are forty, less one&mdash;sowing, ploughing,
reaping, binding sheaves, threshing, winnowing, sifting,
grinding, riddling, kneading, baking, shearing wool, whitening,
carding, dyeing, spinning, warping, making two spools, weaving
two threads, taking out two threads, twisting, loosing, sewing
two stitches, tearing thread for two sewings, hunting the
gazelle, slaughtering, skinning, salting, curing its skin, tanning,
cutting up, writing two letters, erasing to write two
letters, building, demolishing, quenching, kindling, hammering,
carrying from private to public property. Lo, these are
principal works&mdash;forty, less one.
</p>

<p>
3. And another rule the Sages laid down: <q>All that is
worthy of reservation, and they reserve its like&mdash;if they carry
it out on the Sabbath, they are responsible for a sin-offering;
and everything which is not worthy of reservation, and they
do not reserve its like&mdash;if they carry it out on the Sabbath,
none is responsible but the reserver.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. Whoever brings out straw&mdash;a heifer's mouthful; hay&mdash;a
camel's mouthful; chaff&mdash;a lamb's mouthful; herbs&mdash;a kid's
mouthful; garlic leaves and onion leaves&mdash;if fresh, the size of
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
a dried fig&mdash;if dry, a kid's mouthful; but they must not add
one with the other, for they are not equal in their measures.
Whoever carries out food the size of a dried fig, is guilty of
death. And victuals, they may add one to another as they are
equal in their measures, excepting their peels and their kernels,
and their stalks and the fine and coarse bran. Rabbi Judah
says, <q>excepting the peels of lentils, as they may cook them
with them.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VIII</head>

<p>
1. One may bring out wine sufficient for the
cup,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, one
part wine and three parts water.</note> milk
sufficient for a gulp, honey sufficient for a bruise, oil sufficient
to anoint a small member, water sufficient to moisten
the eye-salve, and the rest of all beverages a quarter of a log,
and whatever can be poured out<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>E.g.</hi>,
foul water.</note> a quarter of a log. Rabbi
Simeon says, <q>all of them by the quarter log.</q> And they did
not mention these measures save for those who reserve them.
</p>

<p>
2. <q>Whoever brings out cord sufficient to make an ear for
a tub, bulrush sufficient to hang the sieve and the riddle?</q>
Rabbi Judah said, <q>sufficient to take from it the measure of a
child's shoe; paper sufficient to write on it the signature of the
taxgatherers; erased paper sufficient to wrap round a small
bottle of balm&mdash;is guilty</q> (of death).
</p>

<p>
3. Leather sufficient for an amulet; parchment polished on
both sides, sufficient to write a sign for a door-post; vellum
sufficient to write on it a small portion, which is in phylacteries,
that is, <q>Hear, O Israel;</q> ink sufficient to write two letters;
kohl<note place='foot'>Henna dust for women's eyes.</note>
sufficient to paint one eye.
</p>

<p>
4. Bird-lime sufficient to put on the top of a perch; pitch
or sulphur to fill a hole; wax sufficient to fill the mouth of a
small hole; brick-clay sufficient to make a mouth of a crucible
bellows for goldsmiths&mdash;Rabbi Judah says, <q>sufficient to make
a crucible stand;</q> bran sufficient to put on the mouth of
a crucible blow-pipe for goldsmiths; ointment sufficient to
anoint the little finger of girls&mdash;Rabbi Judah says, <q>sufficient
to make the hair grow;</q> Rabbi Nehemiah says, <q>to freshen
the temple.</q>
</p>

<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>

<p>
5. Red earth <q>as the seal of merchants</q>&mdash;the words of R.
Akiba; but the Sages say, <q>as the seal of letters;</q> dung and
fine sand, <q>sufficient to manure a cabbage stalk,</q>&mdash;the words
of Rabbi Akiba; but the Sages say, <q>sufficient to manure a
leek;</q> coarse sand sufficient to put on a full lime-hod; a reed
sufficient to make a pen. <q>But if it be thick or split?</q> <q>sufficient
to boil with it a hen's egg easy (to be cooked) among
eggs, mixed with oil and put in a pan.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. A bone sufficient to make a spoon,&mdash;Rabbi Judah said,
<q>sufficient to make the ward of a key;</q> glass sufficient to
scrape the top of a shuttle; a lump of earth or a stone sufficient
to fling at a bird; Rabbi Eliezer said, <q>sufficient to fling
at a beast.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. <q>A potsherd?</q> <q>Sufficient to put between two beans,</q>&mdash;the
words of Rabbi Judah; Rabbi Meier says, <q>sufficient
to take away fire with it;</q> Rabbi José says, <q>sufficient to receive
in it the fourth of a log.</q> Said Rabbi Meier, <q>Although
there is no visible proof of the matter, there is an indication of
the matter, as is said, <q>there shall not be found in the bursting
of it a sherd to take fire from the hearth.</q></q><note place='foot'>Isaiah
xxx. 14.</note> Rabbi José said to him, <q>thence is the visible proof,
<q>or to take water out of the pit.</q></q><note place='foot'>Isaiah xxx. 14.</note>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>On The Passover</head>

<quote rend='display'>
Searching for Leaven&mdash;How Leaven Is to be Put Away&mdash;Restrictions
with Regard to It&mdash;What Things Make Leaven&mdash;Leavening&mdash;Work
on the Eve of the Passover&mdash;Trades Allowed&mdash;Men of
Jericho&mdash;Hezekiah&mdash;The
Daily Offering&mdash;Intention&mdash;Slaughter of Passover
Offering&mdash;Mode of Proceeding&mdash;The Passover on a Sabbath&mdash;Discussion
Between R. Akiba and R. Eleazar&mdash;Roasting the Passover&mdash;Various
Contingencies&mdash;Hindrances&mdash;Rules and Directions&mdash;How
the Passover Is to be Eaten&mdash;Praise and Thanksgiving.
</quote>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I</head>

<p>
1. On the eve of the fourteenth day of Nisan<note place='foot'>Nisan
nearly corresponds with the month of March.</note> men search
for leaven by candlelight. Every place where men do not bring
in leaven, there is no need of search. <q>And wherefore do they
say, two lines of barrels in the wine cellar?</q> <q>The place is
meant into which persons bring leaven.</q> The school of Shammai
say, <q>two rows in front of the whole cellar.</q> But the
school of Hillel say, <q>the two outer lines on the top.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. People need not suspect, lest perchance the weasel have
slipped (with leaven) from house to house or from place to
place. If so, from court to court, from city to city, there is
no end to the matter.
</p>

<p>
3. Rabbi Judah said, <q>men search on the eve of the fourteenth
and on the morning of the fourteenth day, and at the
time of burning it.</q> But the Sages say, <q>if one did not
search on the eve of the fourteenth, he must search on the
fourteenth; if he did not search on the fourteenth, he must
search during the feast; if he did not search during the feast,
he must search after the feast; and whatever remains, he shall
leave well concealed, that there be no further need of search
after it.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. Rabbi Meier said, <q>men may eat it till five
o'clock,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, 11 o'clock
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.m.</hi> To obtain our
computation of time, six must be added
to the hours mentioned in the Mishna.</note> and
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
burn it at the beginning of six.</q> Rabbi Judah said, <q>they
may eat it till four, and they are in suspense about five, but they
burn it at the beginning of six.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. And again said R. Judah, <q>two loaves of the disallowed
praise-offering were placed on the portico of the Temple inclosure;
whilst they were placed there, all the people might eat
leaven. If one were taken down they were in suspense; they
neither ate nor burned it. When both were taken down they
began to burn it.</q> Rabban Gamaliel said, <q>men may eat
ordinary food till four o'clock, and the heave-offering till five
o'clock, but they burned the leaven at six o'clock.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. Rabbi Chanina, the deputy of the priesthood, said, <q>from
the (first) days of the priesthood the priests did not object
to burn the flesh rendered legally unclean<note place='foot'>When
uncleanness is mentioned, it is to be understood of legal
uncleanness.</note> with the second
degree of uncleanness, with the flesh rendered legally unclean
with the first degree of uncleanness. Even though they should
add legal uncleanness to legal uncleanness.</q> Rabbi Akiba
went further and said, <q>from the (first) days of the priesthood
the priests did not object to light the oil which was disallowed
on the day of a man's baptism (who had been legally
unclean), with a candle which was unclean with the uncleanness
of the dead, even though they should add legal uncleanness
to legal uncleanness.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. Said R. Meier, <q>from their words we learn that men may
burn the clean heave-offering of leaven, with that which is
unclean, on account of the passover.</q> To him replied Rabbi
José, <q>this is not the conclusion.</q> But Rabbi Eliezer and
Rabbi Joshua confess <q>that men should burn each by itself.</q>
And the contention is with regard to what is doubtful, and what
is unclean. Because Rabbi Eliezer said, <q>thou shalt burn each
by itself.</q> But R. Joshua said, <q>both at once.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II</head>

<p>
1. The whole time that it is allowed to eat leaven, men may
feed beasts with it, and wild animals and fowls, and they may
sell it to a stranger. And they are allowed to enjoy it in every
way. When that season has passed over its enjoyment is disallowed,
and they must not heat with it an oven or a stove.
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
Rabbi Judah said, <q>there is no riddance of leaven but by burning.</q>
But the Sages say, <q>also by powdering and scattering
it to the wind, or casting it into the sea.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. <q>The leaven of a stranger, over which the passover has
passed?</q> <q>Its enjoyment is allowed.</q> <q>But of an Israelite?</q>
<q>Its enjoyment is disallowed,</q> as is said,<note place='foot'>Exod.
xiii. 7.</note> <q>And there
shall no leavened bread be seen with thee.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. <q>The stranger who has lent money to an Israelite on his
leaven?</q> <q>After passover its enjoyment is allowed.</q> <q>And
an Israelite who lent money to the stranger on his leaven?</q>
<q>Its enjoyment after passover is disallowed.</q> <q>Leaven over
which a building fell?</q> <q>It is as though it was cleared away.</q>
Rabban Simon, son of Gamaliel, said, <q>all after which the dog
cannot snuff.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. <q>He who has eaten a leavened heave-offering during the
passover in error?</q> <q>He must pay its value and a fifth
more.</q> <q>In presumption?</q> <q>He is free from the payment,
and from its value even for fuel.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>,
he is to be put to death forthwith.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. These are the things by which one can discharge his
obligation to eat unleavened bread during the passover; with
cakes made of wheat, and barley, and rye, and oats, and spelt;
and they discharge their obligation in that of which the tithing
was doubtful, and in the first tithe after the heave-offering
was separated from it, and in second tithes and holy things
after their redemption. And the priests discharge their obligation
with cakes of dough-offering and heave-offering, but
not with that which owes first tithes, or before the heave-offering
was separated from it, nor with that which owes second
tithes or holy things before their redemption. <q>The loaves
of the praise-offering and the cakes of the Nazarite?</q> <q>If
made for themselves, they do not discharge the obligation: if
made for sale in the market, they discharge the obligation.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. And these are the herbs with which one discharges his
obligation to eat bitter herbs in the passover: lettuce, endives,
horse-radish, liquorice, and coriander. The obligation can be
discharged whether they be moist or dry, but not if they be
pickled, or much boiled, or even a little boiled. And they may
be united to form the size of an olive. And the obligation may
be discharged with their roots; and also if their tithes be in
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
doubt; and with their first tithing, when the heave-offering
has been taken from them; and with their second tithe, and
with holy things which are redeemed.
</p>

<p>
7. Persons must not moisten bran during the passover for
chickens, but they may scald it. A woman must not moisten
bran in her hand when she goes to the bath. But she may rub
it dry on her flesh. A man should not chew wheat and leave
it on a wound during Passover, because it becomes leavened.
</p>

<p>
8. People must not put flour into the charoseth<note place='foot'>Fruit-sauce; a
mixture of dates, raisins, and other fruits, to recall the
memory of the mortar from which the bricks in Egypt were made.</note> or into the
mustard. <q>But if one puts it?</q> <q>He must eat it off-hand.</q>
But Rabbi Meier forbids it. They must not boil the passover
offering in liquids nor in fruit juice. But one may smear it
(after it is roasted), or dip it into them. Water used by the
baker must be poured away because it becomes leavened.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III</head>

<p>
1. These cause transgression during passover: the Babylonian
cuthack,<note place='foot'>Fragments of chickens and dough
left to ferment.</note> and the Median beer, and the Edomite vinegar,
and the Egyptian zithum,<note place='foot'>A compound of barley, wild saffron,
and salt, one-third of each.</note> and the purifying dough of the
dyer,<note place='foot'>A dough or unripe grain lid put
over the liquid to absorb the dregs from the foam of
fermentation.</note> and the clarifying grain of the cooks, and the paste of
the bookbinders. Rabbi Eleazar said, <q>even the cosmetics of
women.</q> This is the rule. All kinds of grain whatever may
cause transgression during the passover. These are negative
commands, and they are not visited by cutting off.
</p>

<p>
2. <q>Dough in a split of a kneading trough?</q> <q>If there
be the size of an olive in a single place one is bound to clear
it out.</q> Less than this is worthless from its minuteness. And
so is it with the question of uncleanness. Particularity causes
division. <q>But if one wish it to remain?</q> <q>It is reckoned as
the trough.</q> <q>Dough dried up?</q><note place='foot'>Literally,
<q>deaf</q>; that is, dough which does not rise, or that sounds dull
when it is struck.</note> <q>If it be like that which
can become leavened it is forbidden.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. <q>How do persons separate the dough-offering when it
becomes unclean on a holiday?</q> Rabbi Eleazar said, <q>you
cannot call it a dough-offering till it be baked.</q> Rabbi Judah,
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
the son of Bethira, said, <q>you must put it in cold water.</q> Said
R. Joshua, <q>it is not leaven so as to transgress the negative
command <q>It shall not be seen nor found,</q><note place='foot'>Exod.
xi. 19.</note> but it must be
separated and left till the evening. But if it become leavened
it is leavened.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. Rabban Gamaliel said, <q>three women may knead at once,
and bake in one oven, each after the other.</q> But the Sages say,
<q>three women may be busied with the dough, one kneads, and
one prepares, and one bakes.</q> Rabbi Akiba said, <q>all women,
and all wood, and all ovens, are not alike.</q> This is the rule.
<q>If it ferment it must be smoothed down with cold water.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. Dough which begins to leaven must be burned, but he
who eats it is free. When it begins to crack it must be burned,
and he who eats it must be cut off. <q>What is leavening?</q>
<q>Like the horns of locusts.</q> <q>Cracking?</q> <q>When the
cracks intermingle.</q> The words of R. Judah. But the Sages
say, <q>if either of them be eaten, the eater must be cut off.</q>
<q>And what is leavening?</q> <q>All which changed its appearance,
as when a man's hairs stand on end through fright.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. <q>If the fourteenth day of Nisan happened on the Sabbath?</q>
<q>They must clear off all the leaven before the Sabbath
begins.</q> The words of R. Meier. But the Sages say, <q>in the
proper season.</q> Rabbi Eleazar, the son of Zaduk, said, <q>the
heave-offering before the Sabbath, and ordinary things in the
proper season.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. <q>If one went to kill his passover, or circumcise his son,
or to eat the marriage-feast in the house of his father-in-law,
and he remembered that there was leaven in his house?</q> <q>If
he can he must return and clear it out, and return to his duties.
He must return and clear it away. But if not, he can esteem
it as nothing in his heart.</q> <q>(If one went) to save a person
from the militia, or from a river, or from robbers, or from
burning, or from the fall of buildings?</q> <q>He may esteem
it as nothing in his heart.</q> <q>But if he is reposing at his ease?</q>
<q>He must return off-hand.</q>
</p>

<p>
8. And so also when one went forth from Jerusalem and
remembered that he had holy flesh in his hand. If he passed
Zophim<note place='foot'>An eminence from which there was a
clear view of the temple.</note> he must burn it on the spot. But if not he must return
and burn it in front of the temple with the wood of the
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
altar. <q>And for how much flesh or leaven must men return?</q>
Rabbi Meier said, <q>both of them the size of an egg.</q> Rabbi
Judah said, <q>both the size of an olive.</q> But the Sages say,
<q>Holy flesh the size of an olive, and leaven the size of an
egg.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV</head>

<p>
1. <q>A place in which men are accustomed to do work on the
eve of the passover?</q> <q>For half a day they may work.</q> <q>A
place in which they are not accustomed to work?</q> <q>They
must not work.</q> <q>If one goes from a place where they work
to a place where they do not work; or from a place where they
do not work to a place where they do work?</q> <q>The Sages put
on him the burden<note place='foot'>The burden means that the man is
forbidden to work.</note> of the place from which he went, or the
burden of the place to which he came; but a man should not
change the customs of a place, as it causes quarrels.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. Like to him is he who carried fruits of the Sabbatical
year from a place where they were finished growing to a place
where they were not finished growing; or from a place where
they were not finished to a place where they were finished.
He is bound to remove them. Rabbi Judah said, <q>they can
say to him, go and bring them for yourself from the field.</q><note place='foot'>See
treatise on the <ref target="talmud_sabbatical_chap_ix_5">Sabbatical year,
ix. 5</ref>, etc.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. <q>A place in which men are accustomed to sell small
cattle to Gentiles?</q> <q>They may sell them.</q> <q>A place in
which they are not accustomed to sell them?</q> <q>They may
not sell them.</q> But in no place may they sell working cattle&mdash;calves,
ass-foals, either unblemished or broken down.<note place='foot'>Lest the
Gentiles should set them to work on the Sabbath.</note>
Rabbi Judah <q>allowed the broken down.</q> The son of Bethira
<q>allowed a horse.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. <q>A place where men are accustomed to eat roast meat
on the night of the passover?</q> <q>They may eat it.</q> <q>A place
in which they are not accustomed to eat it?</q> <q>They may not
eat it.</q> <q>A place in which they are accustomed to light a
candle on the night of the Day of Atonement?</q> <q>They may
light it.</q> <q>A place in which they are not accustomed to light
it?</q> <q>They may not light it.</q> But men may light candles
in the synagogues, and in the schools, and in the dark streets,
and for the sick.
</p>

<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>

<p>
5. <q>A place in which men are accustomed to do work on the
ninth of Ab;</q><note place='foot'>Part of July and August. The ninth
of Ab is the anniversary of the threefold destruction of
the Temple.</note> <q>They may work.</q> <q>A place in which they
are not accustomed to work?</q> <q>They may not work.</q> But
everywhere the disciples of the Sages are idle. Rabban Simon,
the son of Gamaliel, said, <q>a man may always make himself a
disciple of the Sages.</q> But the Sages say, <q>in Judah they
did work on the eves of the passovers for half a day, and in
Galilee they did nothing.</q> And work in the night before the
passover the school of Shammai disallowed; but the school of
Hillel <q>allowed it till sunrise.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. Rabbi Meier said, <q>every work which was begun before
the fourteenth day of Nisan may be finished on the fourteenth;
but it must not be commenced on the fourteenth, even though
it can be finished.</q> And the Sages say, <q>three trades can
carry on business on the eves of the passovers for half a day;
and these are they&mdash;the tailors, and the barbers, and the
washers.</q> Rabbi José, the son of Judah, said, <q>also shoemakers.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. Persons may set hens on their nests on the fourteenth.
<q>But if the hen ran off?</q> <q>They may return her to her
place.</q> <q>And if she died?</q> <q>They may set another instead
of her.</q> They may clear away from beneath the feet of beasts
on the fourteenth. But on the holiday (or middle-days) they
put it aside. They may carry to and bring vessels from the
house of the trader, even though they be not necessary for the
holiday.
</p>

<p>
8. The men of Jericho did six things, in three they were
prohibited, and in three they were allowed. And these are
they in which they were allowed: they engrafted dates the
whole fourteenth day of Nisan, and they shortened the
<q>Hear,</q><note place='foot'>Deut. vi. 4.</note>
and they reaped and stacked new corn before <q>the
sheaf</q><note place='foot'>Lev. xxiii. 15.</note>
was offered; and they were allowed. And in these
they were prohibited: they used the produce of what was consecrated,
and they ate on the Sabbath the fruit that had fallen
down from the trees, and they gave<note place='foot'>Lev. xix. 9, 10.</note>
(to the poor) the corners of the
fields of vegetables. And the Sages prohibited them
from these things.<note place='foot'>Because the poor might eat them untithed,
thinking they were Peah.</note>
</p>

<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>

<p>
9. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Bereitha&mdash;External Tradition.</hi>&mdash;Hezekiah the king
did six things; to three the Sages consented, and to three they
did not consent. He carried the bones of his father (Ahaz) on
a rope bed,<note place='foot'>To show his abhorrence of his father's
idolatry.</note> and they consented. He powdered the brazen
serpent,<note place='foot'>2 Kings xviii. 4.</note>
and they consented. He concealed the book of medicines,<note place='foot'>Lest
the people should substitute medicine for God.</note>
and they consented. And to three they did not consent:
he cut off (the gold from) the doors of the temple<note place='foot'>2
Kings xviii. 16.</note> and
sent it to the Assyrian king, and they did not consent. He
stopped the waters of the upper Gihon,<note place='foot'>2 Chron. xxxii.
4.</note> and they did not consent.
He introduced an intercalary Nisan, and they did not
consent.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V</head>

<p>
1. The daily offering was slaughtered at half-past
eight,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, 2.30
<hi rend='smallcaps'>p.m.</hi></note>
and offered at half-past nine. On the eve of the passover it
was slaughtered at half-past seven and offered at half-past
eight, whether the passover fell on a week-day or on the Sabbath.
When the eve of the passover began on the eve of the
Sabbath (Friday), it was slaughtered at half-past six, and
offered at half-past seven, and the passover followed after it.
</p>

<p>
2. <q>The passover offering, which was slaughtered without
intention&mdash;and the priest took its blood, and he went and
sprinkled it without intention?</q> or <q>with intention, and without
intention?</q> or <q>without intention and with intention?</q>
<q>It is disallowed.</q> <q>How can it be with intention and without
intention?</q> <q>With intention partly for the passover, and
with intention partly for peace-offerings.</q> <q>Without intention
and with intention?</q> <q>With intention partly for peace-offerings,
and with intention partly for the passover-offering.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. <q>If he slaughtered the passover for those who may not
legally eat it&mdash;for those who are not reckoned in one company&mdash;for
the uncircumcised, and for the unclean?</q> <q>It is disallowed.</q>
<q>For those who may eat, and for those who may
not eat it?</q> <q>For those who are reckoned in one company,
and for those who are not so reckoned?</q> <q>For circumcised,
and for uncircumcised?</q> <q>For unclean, and for clean?</q> <q>It
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
is allowed.</q> <q>If he slaughtered it before noon?</q> <q>It is
disallowed.</q> Because it is said <q>between the evenings.</q><note place='foot'>Exod.
xii. 6.</note> <q>If
he slaughtered it before the daily offering?</q> <q>It is allowed.</q>
Except that one must keep stirring<note place='foot'>To prevent its
coagulating.</note> its blood, till the blood of
the daily offering be sprinkled. <q>But if it be <emph>even</emph> sprinkled
(before?)</q> <q>It is lawful.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. <q>He who slaughtered the passover-offering possessing
leaven?</q> <q>He transgressed a negative command.</q><note place='foot'>Exod.
xxiii. 18.</note> Rabbi
Judah said, <q>this applies even to the daily offering (of that
evening).</q> Rabbi Simon said, <q>the slaughter of the passover
on the fourteenth with intention for the passover makes (a
man possessing leaven) guilty; but if it be slaughtered without
intention for the passover he is free.</q> <q>And in all other
sacrifices during the feast, whether one sacrifice with or without
the proper intention?</q> <q>He is free.</q> <q>When one thus
offers in the feast itself with proper intention?</q> <q>He is
free.</q> <q>Without proper intention?</q> <q>He is guilty.</q> <q>And
in all the other sacrifices, when one possessing leaven offers
either with or without intention?</q> <q>He is guilty, only excepting
the sin-offering, which was slaughtered without intention.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. The passover was slaughtered<note place='foot'>Josephus mentions the number of
lambs slain at a particular passover to have been numbered by the high priest,
and they were found to have been 256,500. Allowing not less than ten persons
to the eating of each lamb, he computes those present at the feast to have
been 2,700,200 persons.&mdash;Josephus' <q>Wars,</q> vi. 9, 3.</note>
for three bands in succession, as is said,
<q>The whole assembly of the congregation of
Israel</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xii. 6.</note>&mdash;assembly, congregation, Israel.
The first band entered, the court was filled, the doors of the court were locked.
The trumpeters blew with the trumpets, blew an alarm, and
blew. The priests stood in rows, and in their hands were bowls
of silver and bowls of gold. All the silver row was entirely
silver, and all the golden row was entirely gold. They were
not mingled. And the bowls were not flat-bottomed, lest they
should lay them down, and the blood be coagulated.
</p>

<p>
6. When an Israelite slaughtered, and a priest caught the
blood, he gave it to his companion, and his companion to his
companion, and he took the full, and returned the empty bowl.
The priest nearest the altar poured it out at once in front of
the foundation of the altar.
</p>

<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>

<p>
7. The first band went out, the second band entered; the
second went out, the third entered. As was the proceeding
of the first, so was the proceeding of the second and the third.
They read the praise.<note place='foot'>Psalms cxiii.-cxviii.</note>
When they finished they repeated it,
and after repeating it they read it a third time, even though
they did not complete it thrice in their time. R. Judah said,
<q>during the time of the third band they did not reach to <q>I
love the Lord, for He hath heard,</q> because the people were
few.</q>
</p>

<p>
8. As was the proceeding in ordinary days, so was the proceeding
on the Sabbath, save that the priests washed out the
court,<note place='foot'>They washed the court indirectly by
stopping a canal of water which overflowed the court; they afterward opened
it, when all flowed off again.</note> though not with the will of the Sages. R.
Judah said, <q>a cup was filled with mixed-up blood,<note place='foot'>Taken
from the intermingled blood of the many offerings.</note> and poured out at
once upon the altar;</q> but the Sages <q>did not admit it.</q>
</p>

<p>
9. <q>How did they hang up and skin the passover sacrifices?</q>
<q>Iron hooks were fixed in the walls and pillars, and
on them they hung them, and skinned them.</q> <q>And every one
who had not a place to hang them up and skin them?</q> <q>Thin
smooth rods were there, and he rested one on his shoulder and
on the shoulder of his companion, and hung it up and skinned
it.</q> Rabbi Eliezer said, <q>when the fourteenth began on a
Sabbath, he rested his hand on the shoulder of his companion,
and the hand of his companion on his shoulder, and he hung it
up and skinned it.</q>
</p>

<p>
10. He cut it open, and took out its entrails. He put them
on a dish and incensed them on the altar. The first party went
out, and sat down on the Mountain of the House. The second
party were in the Chel,<note place='foot'>See
<ref target="talmud_measurements_chap_ii_3"><q>Measurements,</q> ii. 3</ref>.</note>
and the third party remained in their
place. When it grew dark they went out and roasted their
passovers.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI</head>

<p>
1. These things in the passover abrogate the command
against work on the Sabbath: its slaughtering, and the sprinkling
of its blood, and purging its inwards, and incensing its fat.
But its roasting and the rinsing of its inwards do not abrogate
the Sabbath. But to carry it, and to bring it beyond a Sabbath
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
day's journey, and to cut off its wen, do not abrogate the Sabbath.
Rabbi Eleazar said, <q>they abrogate it.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. Said Rabbi Eleazar, <q>and is not this the teaching? when
slaughtering is work it abrogates the Sabbath. Things which
are for <q>resting</q> do not abrogate the Sabbath.</q><note place='foot'>The
following subtle discussion arises out of the distinction between
<q>work</q> forbidden by the law of God and <q>resting from work</q> enjoined by
tradition.</note> To him said
Rabbi Joshua, <q>a holiday will give the proof; the Sages permitted
that which is work, and they forbade that which is resting.</q>
Rabbi Eleazar said to him, <q>what do you mean, Joshua? what
comparison is there between a command and that which is
voluntary?</q> Rabbi Akiba answered and said, <q>sprinkling<note place='foot'>The
sprinkling of a person unclean from touching a dead body when the
passover fell on a Sabbath.</note> will give the proof, because it is a positive
command, and it is for <q>resting,</q> and does not abrogate the Sabbath; but you
should not wonder at this, even though it be a command, as it
is for <q>resting,</q> and does not abrogate the Sabbath.</q> Rabbi
Eleazar said to him, <q>and on that I form my judgment, when
slaughtering is work it abrogates the Sabbath; sprinkling,
which is for <q>resting,</q> does it not teach that it abrogates the
Sabbath?</q> Rabbi Akiba said to him, <q>on the contrary, if
sprinkling, which is for <q>resting,</q> does not abrogate the Sabbath,
slaughtering, which is for work, is it not the teaching?
should not abrogate the Sabbath.</q> Rabbi Eleazar said to
him, <q>Akiba, thou hast annulled what is written in the Law,
<q>between the evenings,</q> <q>in its appointed time,</q> whether it be
a week-day or a Sabbath.</q> He said to him, <q>My teacher,
give me proof of an appointed time for these things, like the
appointed time for slaughtering the passover-offering?</q> The
rule is, said R. Akiba, <q>all work for the passover which it is
possible to do on the eve of the Sabbath does not abrogate
the Sabbath; slaughtering, which it is impossible to do on the
eve of the passover which falls on a Sabbath, abrogates the
Sabbath.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. <q>When do men bring with the passover a feast-offering?</q>
<q>When the passover falls on a week-day, when those
who offer it are legally clean, and when the lamb is too small
for the eaters. But when the passover falls on a Sabbath,
when the lamb is too much for the eaters, and there is legal uncleanness,
they should not bring with it a feast-offering.</q>
</p>

<anchor id='talmud_passover_chap_vi_4'/>
<p>
4. The feast-offering<note place='foot'>This refers to the second chagigah&mdash;the
feast-offering of individuals on the 15th of Nisan. It is called by the general
name passover, John xviii. 28. Want of acquaintance with this subject
has led some commentators to suppose that there is a discrepancy between the
account of the last passover of our Lord as related in the Synoptical Gospels, and
as recorded by St. John.</note> came from flocks, from herds, from
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
sheep and goats, from rams and ewes, and it may be eaten during
a period of two days and one night.
</p>

<p>
5. <q>The passover which was slaughtered without the proper
intention on a Sabbath?</q> <q>The offerer of it is indebted for
a sin-offering.</q> <q>And all the other sacrifices which he
slaughtered for the passover?</q> <q>If they be not suitable for
it he is guilty.</q> <q>And if they be suitable?</q> Rabbi Eleazar
declares him <q>indebted for a sin-offering.</q> But R. Joshua
<q>frees him.</q> Said Rabbi Eleazar, <q>what! if the passover
which was allowed for proper intention when the offerer
changed its intention, makes him guilty; is it not the teaching
that sacrifices, which are disallowed for want of proper intention
when the offerer changed their intention, make him
also guilty?</q> Rabbi Joshua said to him, <q>no; if thou saidst
in the passover when he changed its intention it is changed to
a thing disallowed, thou wilt say in the other sacrifices when
he changed their intention they are changed to a thing allowed.</q>
Rabbi Eleazar said to him, <q>the congregational offerings will
give the proof, because they are rendered lawful on the Sabbath
by intention, but whoever slaughtered (another) sacrifice with
their intention is guilty.</q> Rabbi Joshua said to him, <q>no; if
thou sayest so in the congregational offerings, which are a
determined number, thou wilt also say so in the passover sacrifice
which has no determined number.</q> Rabbi Meier said,
<q>even he who slaughtered other offerings on the Sabbath, with
the intention of the congregational offerings, is free.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. <q>When one slaughtered the passover, but not for its
eaters, or not for those numbered to eat it, for uncircumcised
and for unclean persons?</q> <q>He is guilty.</q> <q>For its eaters
and not for its eaters? For its reckoning and not for its
reckoning? For circumcised and uncircumcised? For clean
and unclean?</q> <q>He is free.</q> <q>He slaughtered it, and it was
found blemished?</q> <q>He is guilty.</q> <q>He slaughtered it
and it was found torn in secret?</q> <q>He is free.</q> <q>He
slaughtered it, and it became known that its owners retired
from it, or died, or became legally unclean?</q> <q>He is free,
because he slaughtered it with lawful permission.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VII</head>

<p>
1. <q>How do men roast the passover?</q> <q>They bring a
stick of pomegranate and thrust it through its mouth to its
tail. And they put its legs and intestines inside it.</q> The words
of R. José, the Galilean. Rabbi Akiba said, <q>that is a kind of
boiling, therefore they hang them outside of it.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. Men must not roast the passover on a spit or a gridiron.
Said R. Zaduk, <q>it happened to Rabban Gamaliel that he said
to Zabi, his servant, <q>go and roast for us the passover on the
gridiron.</q></q> <q>If it touch the side of the oven?</q> <q>That part
must be peeled off.</q> <q>If its gravy drop on the side of the
oven, and again return on it?</q> <q>That part must be taken
out.</q> <q>If the gravy drop on the fine flour?</q> <q>That part
must be pulled out</q> (and burned).
</p>

<p>
3. <q>If men anointed (basted) it with oil of the heave-offering?</q>
<q>If it be a company of priests, they may eat it.</q> <q>If
it be a company of Israelites?</q> <q>If it be raw they can wash
it away.</q> <q>But if roast?</q> <q>They must peel off the surface.</q>
<q>If it was anointed with oil of the second tithe?</q> <q>Its value
in money must not be charged to the members of the company,
because they cannot redeem<note place='foot'>Jer. Tal. reads <q>sell.</q></note>
the second tithes in Jerusalem.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. Five things may be brought during legal uncleanness,
but they must not be eaten in legal uncleanness: the sheaf,<note place='foot'>Lev.
xxiii. 11.</note> the two wave loaves,<note place='foot'>Lev. xxiii. 17.</note>
and the shewbread,<note place='foot'>Exod. xxv. 30.</note> sacrifices of peace-offerings
of the congregation,<note place='foot'>Lev. xxiii. 19.</note> and the
kids<note place='foot'>Num. xxviii. 15.</note> on the feast of
the New Moon. The passover which was brought during legal
uncleanness, may be eaten in uncleanness, because in the beginning
the command came only for eating.
</p>

<p>
5. <q>If the flesh be legally unclean and the fat unpolluted?</q>
<q>The priest must not sprinkle its blood on the altar.</q> <q>If
the fat be unclean and the flesh unpolluted?</q> <q>The priest
may sprinkle its blood.</q> But with other holy offerings it is
not so, for though their flesh be unclean, and their fat remains
unpolluted, the priest may sprinkle their blood on the altar.
</p>

<p>
6. <q>If the congregation be legally unclean, or its majority,
or the priests be legally unclean, and the congregation legally
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
clean?</q> <q>The passover may be kept in legal uncleanness.</q>
<q>If the minority of the congregation be legally unclean?</q>
<q>The clean majority can keep the first, and the unclean
minority the second passover</q> (on the fourteenth day of the
following month).
</p>

<p>
7. When the blood of the passover-offering was poured on
the altar, and it was afterward known that it was unclean, the
(golden)<note place='foot'>Exod. xxviii. 36-38.</note>
plate of the High Priest makes it accepted. When
the body of the paschal sacrifice was unclean, <q>the plate</q>
cannot make it accepted, as they say the Nazarite and the
celebrant of the passover have the uncleanness of the blood accepted
with <q>the plate.</q> But <q>the plate</q> does not make the
legal uncleanness of the body of the paschal lamb accepted.
If it be legally unclean with an unknown uncleanness, the
plate makes it accepted.
</p>

<p>
8. <q>If it be legally unclean in whole or in most part?</q>
<q>The passover must be burned in front of <q>the palace</q><note place='foot'>1
Chron. xxix. 19.</note> with
the wood of the altar.</q> <q>A little which is unclean, and that
which is left over?</q> <q>The owners may burn it in their own
courts, or on their roofs with their own wood.</q> The stingy
ones burnt it in front of the palace, that they might use the
wood of the altar.
</p>

<p>
9. <q>The passover which was carried out of the city, or became
unclean?</q> <q>The owner must burn it off-hand.</q> <q>Its
masters became unclean or died?</q> <q>Let its appearance
change, and let it be burned on the sixteenth.</q><note place='foot'>It remained
uneaten overnight, and therefore must be burned, in accordance
with Exod. xii. 10.</note> Rabbi
Jochanan, the son of Beruka, said, <q>even it must be burned
off-hand, because it has no one to eat it.</q>
</p>

<p>
10. <q>Bones and tendons and what is left over?</q> <q>They
must be burned on the sixteenth.</q> <q>If the sixteenth happened
on a Sabbath?</q> <q>They must be burned on the seventeenth,
because they cannot abrogate either the laws of the Sabbath
or the holiday.</q>
</p>

<p>
11. All that is eaten in a great ox may be eaten in a tender
kid, and the tops of the shoulder-blades, and the gristle.
<q>Whoever broke any bone in a clean passover?</q> <q>He must
receive forty stripes.</q> <q>But for what is left over in the clean,
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
and broken in an unclean passover?</q> <q>He does not receive
the forty</q>.
</p>

<p>
12. <q>A member partly displaced?</q> <q>One must cut in till
he reach the bone, and he must peel off the flesh till he reach
the joint, and he cuts it off. But in other holy offerings one
may cleave the displaced members with an axe, since there
does not exist any (prohibition of) breaking the bone for
them.</q> (For example), from the door-post and inwards is inside.
From the door-post and outwards is outside. The windows
and thickness of the wall are reckoned as inside.
</p>

<p>
13. <q>Two companies which eat the passover in one house?</q>
<q>These turn their faces to this side and eat; and those turn
their faces to that side and eat. And the boiler<note place='foot'>From the
need of a boiler it appears that the wine used at the passover was
mixed with hot water. The wine itself was always red.</note> is between
the companies. The servant stands to mix wine. The servant
must shut his mouth till he serve the other company. He
afterward turns his face till he reach his own company, and
then he may eat. And she who is newly married can turn her
face aside and eat it.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VIII</head>

<p>
1. <q>The married woman, while she is in the house of her
husband?</q> <q>Her husband slaughtered on her account, and
her father slaughtered on her account?</q> <q>She must eat the
passover with her husband.</q> <q>She went to spend the first
feast after her marriage in the house of her father&mdash;her father
slaughtered on her account, and her husband slaughtered on
her account?</q> <q>She may eat in the place which she wishes.</q>
<q>An orphan on whose account the guardians slaughtered?</q>
<q>He may eat in the place which he wishes.</q> <q>A slave of two
partners?</q> <q>He must not eat with both.</q> <q>A slave who is
half free?</q> <q>He must not eat with his master.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. One said to his slave, <q>go and slaughter for me the
passover.</q> <q>He slaughtered a kid?</q> <q>He may eat it.</q> <q>He
slaughtered a lamb?</q> <q>He may eat it.</q> <q>He slaughtered
a kid and a lamb?</q> <q>He may eat of the first.</q> <q>He forgot
what his master said to him&mdash;what shall he do?</q> <q>He must
slaughter a lamb and a kid, and shall say, <q>If my master said
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
to me&mdash;a kid, the kid is on his account, and the lamb is on my
account; and if my master said to me&mdash;a lamb, the lamb is
for him, and the kid is for me.</q></q> <q>If his master forgot what
he said to him?</q> <q>Both animals must go forth to the house
of burning; and they are free from keeping the second passover.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. One said to his sons, <q>I am ready to slaughter the
passover for you who shall first go up to Jerusalem.</q> As
soon as one of them entered with his head and the greater
part of his body inside the city gate, he gained his own share
of the passover, and gained it for his brothers with him. They
may always be reckoned in one company, when each one obtains
the size of an olive. They may first be reckoned, and
afterward withdraw from a company till the passover be
slaughtered. Rabbi Simon said, <q>until its blood be poured
out on their account.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. <q>He who reckoned others with himself in his portion of
the lamb?</q> <q>The members of the company are allowed to
give to him his share, and he may eat of it with his own guests;
and they may eat their portion with their own guests.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. <q>If one observed an issue twice?</q> <q>They may slaughter
the lamb on his account on the seventh day of the issue if
it be the fourteenth day of Nisan.</q> <q>If he observed it
thrice?</q><note place='foot'>If one observed the issue three
times on the same day, he could not be considered clean before he brought a
sacrifice.</note> <q>They may only slaughter on his account on the
eighth day of the issue</q> (if it be the fourteenth day of Nisan).
</p>

<p>
6. <q>The mourner and the person who opened a heap,<note place='foot'>In
which there is a dead body.</note> and
also the person who has the promise of release from prison,
and the sick, and the aged, who are able to eat the size of an
olive?</q> <q>They may slaughter the passover for them.</q> For
all of them they must not slaughter the lamb on their own
account alone, lest they bring the passover into contempt,<note place='foot'>The
mourner might be too sorrowful to eat, the sick too ill to eat, and
the prisoner might be detained in prison, etc.</note>
because there might happen to them some abomination.
They are freed from keeping a second passover&mdash;excepting
him who in opening the heap was unclean from the beginning.
</p>

<p>
7. <q>They must not slaughter the passover for one person.</q>
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
The words of Rabbi Judah; but Rabbi José <q>allowed it.</q>
Even for a company of a hundred, when they cannot eat the
size of an olive, they must not slaughter the passover; and
they must not form a company of women, of slaves, and of little
ones.
</p>

<p>
8. A mourner may be baptized, and eat his passover in the
evening, but not other holy things. <q>He who heard of a death,
or had the bones of his relations collected?</q> <q>He may be
baptized and eat holy things.</q> <q>A stranger who was
proselytized on the eve of the passover?</q> The school of
Shammai say, <q>He may be baptized and eat his passover in
the evening</q>; but the school of Hillel say, <q>he who just departed
from the foreskin is as legally unclean as he who just
departs from the grave.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IX</head>

<p>
1. He who was legally unclean, or in a journey afar off, and
did not keep the first, must keep the second (passover). <q>He
mistook it, or was constrained by force, and did not keep the
first?</q> <q>He must keep the second.</q> <q>If so, why is it said
unclean<note place='foot'>Numbers ix. 10.</note> or
in a journey afar off?</q> <q>Because such persons
are free from being cut off, but those bound to observe it are
to be cut off if they neglect it.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. What is a <q>journey afar off?</q> <q>From Modiim<note place='foot'>About
fifteen miles from Jerusalem. Modiim or Modin was the city of the
Maccabees.</note> and
outward; and so is the measure from Jerusalem on every side.</q>
The words of Rabbi Akiba; Rabbi Eleazar said, <q>from the
threshold of the temple-court and outward.</q> Said R. José,
<q>for this reason there is a dot on the <q>he,</q> to explain not that
it is really afar off, but that one is afar off from the threshold
of the temple-court and outward.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. <q>What is the difference between the first and second
passover?</q> <q>The first passover forbids leaven to be seen or
found; but the second allows unleavened and leavened bread
in one's house.</q> The first passover requires hallel<note place='foot'>Psalms
cxiii.-cxviii.</note> during
eating, but the second does not require hallel during eating.
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
Both require hallel in their preparations, and the paschal sacrifices
must be eaten roasted on unleavened bread with bitter
herbs, and they both abrogate the Sabbath.
</p>

<p>
4. <q>The passover-offering which was brought during legal
uncleanness?</q> <q>The man or woman with an issue may not
eat of it, nor she in separation or in childbirth. But if they
eat they are free from being cut off.</q> Rabbi Eleazar <q>frees
them even in going into the sanctuary.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. <q>What is the difference between the passover of Egypt
and the passover of succeeding generations?</q> <q>The passover
of Egypt was taken on the tenth day,<note place='foot'>Exod. xii.
3.</note> and required the
sprinkling with a bunch of hyssop on the lintel and the two
side posts, and was eaten with haste in one night; but the
passover of succeeding generations exists the whole seven
days.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. Said R. Joshua, <q>I once heard that the substitute<note place='foot'>The
substitute refers to one animal changed for another, which had been
intended for the passover-offering.</note> of
the passover-offering can be sacrificed, and that the substitute
of the passover-offering cannot be sacrificed, I have no one
to explain.</q> Said R. Akiba, <q>I will explain: the passover-offering,
which was found (after being lost) before the time
for slaughtering its substitute, may be pastured till it be blemished,
and it can be sold, and the owner can take for its price
peace-offerings, and so also for its substitute. After the time
for slaughtering the passover-offering its substitute may be
offered for a peace-offering, and so can also its substitute.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. <q>He who set apart a ewe for his passover, or a male
of two years?</q> <q>He may pasture it till it be blemished. And
he can sell it, and its price may be used for a free-will offering.</q>
<q>He who selected his passover, and afterward died?</q>
<q>His son must not offer it after him with the intention of a
passover, but he may offer it with the intention of a peace-offering.</q>
</p>

<p>
8. <q>The passover-offering which was mixed up with other
sacrifices?</q> <q>All must be pastured till they be blemished,
and they must be sold, and the offerer must bring the price
of the best of this kind and the price of the best of that kind,
and the loss he must make up from his private means.</q> <q>The
passover-offering which was mixed up with first-borns?</q>
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
Rabbi Simon said, <q>if there be companies of priests they may
eat it.</q>
</p>

<p>
9. <q>A company<note place='foot'>The following rules are founded on
two principles; firstly, that every lamb must have its own numbered company
of eaters; and secondly, that no person could be numbered with two companies.</note>
which lost its passover-offering, and said
to someone, <q>go and seek it and slaughter it for us</q>; and he
went and found it and slaughtered it, and they meanwhile
also took one and slaughtered it,&mdash;if his be first slaughtered?</q>
<q>He may eat of his and they may eat with him of his.</q> <q>But
if theirs be first slaughtered?</q> <q>They may eat of theirs,
and he may eat of his.</q> <q>But if it be not known which of
them was first slaughtered, or both were slaughtered at
once?</q> <q>He must eat of his passover, but they cannot eat
with him, and their passover must go forth to the house of
burning; and they are freed from keeping a second passover.</q>
<q>He said to them, <q>if I be too late, go and slaughter for me</q>;
he went, and meanwhile found (the lost) one and slaughtered
it, and they took and also slaughtered one. If theirs be first
slaughtered?</q> <q>They may eat of theirs, and he may eat with
them.</q> <q>But if his were first slaughtered?</q> <q>He shall eat
of his, and they shall eat of theirs.</q> <q>But if it be not known
which of them was first slaughtered or both of them were
slaughtered at once?</q> <q>They shall eat of theirs, but he must
not eat with them, and his lamb must go forth to the house
of burning, and he is freed from keeping a second (passover).</q>
<q>If he said to them <q>slaughter for me,</q> and they also said to
him <q>slaughter for us?</q></q> <q>All shall eat of that one first
slaughtered.</q> <q>But if it be not known which of them was
first slaughtered?</q> <q>Both must go forth to the house of
burning.</q> <q>If he did not say it to them, nor they say it to
him?</q> <q>They are not sureties one for the other</q> (and they
must eat apart from each other).
</p>

<p>
10. <q>Two companies had their passover-offerings mixed:
this company drew out one for themselves, and that company
drew out one for themselves. One of these comes to those,
and one of those comes to these, and thus they say, <q>if this
passover be ours, let our hands be withdrawn from yours and
be counted with ours; but if this passover be yours, let our
hands be withdrawn from ours and be counted with yours.</q>
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
And so with five companies of five each, and ten of ten each,
they may draw out and join one from every company, and
say so.</q>
</p>

<p>
11. <q>Two persons who had their passover-offerings
mixed?</q> <q>One draws out one for himself, and the other
draws out one for himself. This one can count with himself
a person invited from the market. And that one can count
with himself a person invited from the market. This individual
comes to that one, and that one comes to this one, and so
they say, <q>if this passover be mine, let thy hands be withdrawn
from thine, and be counted with mine; and if this passover
be thine, let my hands be withdrawn from mine, and be
counted with thine.</q></q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter X</head>

<p>
1. On the eves of the passovers near to the time of evening
prayer a man must not eat till it be dark. And even the poorest
in Israel must not eat till he can recline at ease, and they must
not withhold from him the four cups of wine, even though he
receives the weekly alms.
</p>

<p>
2. When they mix for him the first cup of wine,<note place='foot'>It was
after the first cup of wine was drunk that our Lord washed the disciples'
feet (John xiii. 5; Luke xxii. 17).</note> the school
of Shammai say, <q>he shall repeat the blessing for the day, and
after that the blessing for the wine.</q> But the school of Hillel
say, <q>he shall repeat the blessing for the wine, and after that
the blessing for the day.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. The attendants bring before him greens and lettuce. He
dips the lettuce in its sauce till he come to the time for the
seasoning of the bread. They bring before him unleavened
bread, and lettuce, and the fruit sauce, on two dishes, even
though the fruit sauce is not a command. Rabbi Eleazar, the
son of Zadok, said (it is) <q>a command, and in the time of the
sanctuary they used to bring before him the body of the passover
offering.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. The attendants mixed for him the second cup, and here
the son asks his father, and if the son have no knowledge his
father teaches him, <q>in what is this night different from all
other nights?</q> <q>Because in all other nights we eat leavened
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
and unleavened bread. In this night all is unleavened. Because
in all other nights we eat every herb, in this night bitter
herbs. Because in all other nights we eat flesh roasted,
well boiled, and boiled. In this night all is roasted. Because
in all other nights we dip what we eat once, in this night
twice</q> (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, in the sauce and in the seasoning). And according
to the knowledge of the son his father teaches him. He
begins in shame and he ends in praise. And he expounds
from <q>a Syrian ready to perish was my father,</q><note place='foot'>Deut.
xxvi. 5-11.</note> till he end
the whole passage.
</p>

<p>
5. Rabban Gamaliel used to say, <q>everyone who did not
speak of these three things in the passover did not discharge
his duty, and these are they: the passover, the unleavened
bread, and bitter herbs. Passover, because OMNIPRESENCE
passed over the houses of our fathers in Egypt. Unleavened,
because our fathers were redeemed from Egypt.
Bitter, because the Egyptians made the lives of our fathers bitter
in Egypt.</q> In every generation man is bound to look to
himself as though he in person went out from Egypt, as is
said,<note place='foot'>Exod. xiii. 8.</note> <q>And thou shalt show thy son in that
day, saying, This is done because of that which the Lord did unto me when I
came forth out of Egypt.</q> For this reason we are bound to
acknowledge, to thank, to praise, to glorify, to exalt, to magnify,
to bless, to elevate, without limit, HIM who has done
for our fathers and us all these miracles. He brought us
from slavery to freedom, from sorrow to joy, and from mourning
to festivity, and from thick darkness to great light, and
from servitude to redemption, and let us say before Him Hallelujah.
</p>

<p>
6. <q>How far does he repeat?</q> The school of Shammai
say, till <q>a joyful mother of children.</q><note place='foot'>Psalm
cxiii. 9.</note> But the school of Hillel say, till
<q>the flint into a fountain of waters,</q><note place='foot'>Psalm
cxiv. 8.</note> and he
finished with a <q>blessing for redemption.</q> Rabbi Tarphon
said, <q><q>Who redeemed us and redeemed our fathers from
Egypt,</q> and he does not end with any other blessing.</q> Rabbi
Akiba adds, <q>So the Lord our God and the God of our fathers
shall bring us to holidays and other feast-days yet to come
to us in peace, rejoicing in the building of THY city, and delighting
in THY service; and we shall eat there the sacrifices
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
and the passovers, etc., until <q>Blessed be Thou, Lord, the Redeemer
of Israel.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
7. When the attendants mixed for him the third cup<note place='foot'>The third
cup was called the <q>cup of blessing</q> (1 Cor. x. 16). It was the
one used by our Lord for the institution of the holy sacrament.</note> he
says the blessing for his food, with the fourth cup he finished
the hallel, and said over it the blessing of the Song.<note place='foot'>Psalm
cxxxvi.</note> Between
the first and second cups if he wish to drink, he may drink as
much as he likes. Between the third and fourth he must not
drink.
</p>

<p>
8. Persons are not free after the passover to ask for more
food. <q>If some fall asleep during the passover?</q><note place='foot'>They may
have been overcome with wine (1 Cor. xi. 21).</note> <q>They
may afterward eat of it.</q> <q>All?</q> <q>They must not eat of
it.</q> Rabbi José says, <q>If they dozed?</q> <q>They may eat of
it.</q> <q>If they slept?</q> <q>They must not eat of it.</q>
</p>

<p>
9. The passover after midnight renders hands legally unclean.
False intention and the remains of the feast render
hands legally unclean.<note place='foot'>This is explained in the treatise
<ref target='talmud_hands'><q>Hands.</q></ref></note>
<q>When one repeated the passover-blessing?</q>
<q>He is free from the sacrifice-blessing, but the
sacrifice-blessing does not free him from that of the passover.</q>
The words of R. Ishmael. Rabbi Akiba said, <q>this
does not free from that, nor that from this.</q>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>On The Day Of Atonement</head>

<quote rend='display'>
Preparations of the High Priest&mdash;Cleansing the Altar&mdash;Casting
Lots&mdash;Daybreak&mdash;Offerings&mdash;Dress&mdash;Prayer&mdash;The
Goats&mdash;Monobazus&mdash;Helena&mdash;Azazel&mdash;The
Golden Censer&mdash;The Vail&mdash;Holy of
Holies&mdash;<q>Foundation</q>&mdash;Sprinkling
the Blood&mdash;Sending Forth the Goat into
the Wilderness&mdash;High Priest Burning the Bullock and
Goat&mdash;Reading&mdash;Ceremonial&mdash;Rules
and Exceptions&mdash;Repentance and Atonement.
</quote>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I</head>

<p>
1. Seven days before the Day of Atonement the High
Priest was removed from his house to the chamber<note place='foot'>Where
the counsellors sat.</note> Parhedrin,
and the council prepared for him another priest,<note place='foot'>Called Sagan
(suffragan) (2 Kings xxv. 18; Jer. lii. 24).</note> lest
there happen to him any defilement. R. Judah said, <q>they
prepared also another wife, lest his wife die</q>; as is said,<note place='foot'>Lev.
xvi. 6.</note> <q>And he shall atone for himself and for his house</q>; for his
house, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, for his wife. The Sages said to him, <q>if so, there
is no end to the matter.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. All these seven days, he (the high priest) sprinkled the
blood, burned the incense, and trimmed the lamps, and offered
the head and the foot. On the remainder of all the days, if he
wished to offer, he offered; since the high priest first offered
part, and first took part (in the sacrifices).
</p>

<p>
3. The elders from the elders of the great Sanhedrin delivered
to him, and read before him, the ceremonial of the day;
and they said to him, <q>My Lord High Priest, read with thy
mouth, perchance thou hast forgotten, or perchance thou hast
not learned.</q><note place='foot'>As might occur from the frequent
changes during the second Temple.</note> On the eve of the day of atonement,
toward dawn, they placed him in the eastern gate (of the Temple),
and they caused to pass before him bullocks, rams, and lambs,
that he might be skilled and expert in his ministry.
</p>

<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>

<p>
4. All the seven days they did not withhold from him food
and drink; the eve of the day of atonement, with the beginning
of darkness, they did not permit him to eat much, since
food induces sleep.
</p>

<p>
5. The elders of the great Sanhedrin delivered him to the
elders of the priesthood, who brought him to the upper chamber
of the house Abtinas. And they administered to him the
oath,<note place='foot'>That he would incense <q>within</q> the
vail (Lev. xvi. 12, 13), in opposition to
the Sadducees, who maintained that the incense should be burned
<q>without.</q></note> and they left him and departed. And they said to him,
<q>My Lord High Priest, we are ambassadors of the great Sanhedrin,
and thou art our ambassador, and the ambassador of
the great Sanhedrin. We adjure thee by Him, whose Name
dwells in this house, that thou wilt not change aught of all
which we have said to thee.</q> He went apart and wept. They
went apart and wept.<note place='foot'>That such an oath was necessary.</note>
</p>

<p>
6. If he were a learned man, he expounded; but if not, the
disciples of the learned expounded before him. If he were
skilled in reading, he read; but if not, they read before him.
<q>And in what did they read before him?</q> <q>In Job, and in
Ezra, and in Chronicles.</q> Zachariah, the son of Kebutal, said,
<q>I often read before him in Daniel.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. If he desired to sleep, the young priests filliped with the
first finger<note place='foot'>Or the <q>index</q> finger; other
trans. the <q>middle</q> finger.</note> before him, and said to him, <q>My Lord High
Priest, stand up and refresh thyself<note place='foot'>Or change thyself.</note>
once on the pavement,</q> and they kept him
occupied<note place='foot'>Singing to him <q>Unless the Lord
build the house, they labor but in vain that build it,</q> etc.
(Psalm cxxvii.).</note> until the time approached for
slaying (the victims).
</p>

<p>
8. Every day they cleansed the altar at cockcrow, or at its
approach, intermediate before or after it; and on the day of
atonement<note place='foot'>The Jews think that the day of
atonement was the day on which Adam sinned, on which Abraham was circumcised,
and on which Moses offered atonement for the sin of the golden
calf.</note> at midnight; and in the three great feasts, at the
first watch. And before cockcrow the court was crowded with
Israel.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II</head>

<p>
1. At first everyone who wished to (cleanse) the altar,
cleansed it. When they were many, they ran and mounted
the ascent, and each one, who at the middle outstripped his
companion by four cubits, won it. If two were equal the president
said to them, <q>lift your fingers.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>,
cast lots, which was done by placing the priests in a row, and bidding
them to hold up their fingers. After fixing on a certain number, the cap of one
of them was taken off. With this priest the reckoning began, and proceeded till
the prearranged number fell on some one of them; and his was the lot. Particular
care was taken to count the fingers which were held up, and not to
number their persons, as this was considered unlawful. (1 Chron. xxi. 1.)</note>
<q>And what is that?</q>
<q>They lifted one or two fingers, but no one lifted the thumb
in the Sanctuary.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. It happened that two were equal, and running and
mounting the ascent, one of them thrust his companion, so
that he fell, and his leg was broken. And when the great Sanhedrin
saw that they were getting into danger, they decreed
that they should not cleanse the altar save by lot. There were
four lots, and this was the first lot.
</p>

<p>
3. The second lot was: Who should slay? Who sprinkle?
Who should take the ashes from the inner altar? and who
should take the ashes from the candlestick? and who should
carry the members to the ascent? the head and the right foot,
and the hind feet, the tail, and the left foot, the breast, and
the throat, and the two sides, and the inwards, and the fine
flour, and the pancakes, and the wine. Thirteen priests discharged
this lot. Said Ben Asai in the presence of R. Akiba
from the mouth of Rabbi Joshua, <q>like to its way of motion</q>
(when alive).
</p>

<p>
4. The third lot<note place='foot'>The third lot for burning incense was
the most important. It was always done by a fresh man, so that a priest might
burn incense only once during his lifetime. (Luke i. 9; Rev. viii. 3, 4.)</note>
was for new men who came to offer incense,
and they cast the lots. The fourth lot was for new men
with the old, who should carry the members from the ascent
to the altar.
</p>

<p>
5. The daily offering was with nine, ten, eleven, twelve,
priests; not less and not more. <q>How?</q> <q>Itself with nine:
at the feast of Tabernacles in the hand of one, a glass of water
there is ten. The evening offering with eleven, itself with
nine, and in the hands of two, two fagots of wood. On Sabbath,
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
eleven; itself with nine, and two, in their hands two
fragments of incense of the showbread. And on the Sabbath
in the feast of Tabernacles in the hand of one a glass of
water.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. The ram was offered with eleven; the flesh with five, the
inner part, and the fine flour and the wine, to each two and
two.
</p>

<p>
7. The bullock was offered with twenty-four priests. <q>The
head and the right foot?</q> <q>The head with one, and the
foot with two.</q> <q>The chine and the left foot?</q> <q>The tail
with two, and the left foot with two.</q> <q>The breast and
the throat?</q> <q>The breast with one, and the throat with
three, the two hind feet with two, and the two sides with two,
the inner parts and the fine flour, and the wine, each with three
and three.</q> <q>Of which is that said?</q> <q>Of the offering for
the whole congregation.</q> <q>But for the offerings of an individual?</q>
<q>If he wished to offer, he might offer.</q> <q>For
the skinning and cutting up?</q> <q>For these all were equal.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III</head>

<p>
1. The overseer said to them, <q>go and look if the time for
slaughter is come.</q> If it came, the watchman said, <q>it is
brightening.</q><note place='foot'>Or, as you wish.</note>
Matthew the son of Samuel said, <q>is the
whole east light as far as Hebron?</q> and he said <q>yes.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. <q>And why was that necessary?</q> <q>Because it once
happened that the light of the moon came up, and they
deemed it the light from the east.</q> And they slaughtered
the daily offering, and they brought it to the house of burning.
And they brought down the High Priest to the house
of Baptism. This was the rule in the Sanctuary that everyone
who covered his feet (was required) to wash; and everyone
retiring was required to sanctify his hands and feet.
</p>

<p>
3. No one entered the court for service, however clean, until
he washed. The High Priest made five washings and ten
purifications in this day, and all were in the Holy place above
the house of Parva,<note place='foot'>The Gemara says it was so called
because Parva, a magician, built this room and digged through from it to see
the service of the High Priest on the day of atonement; or else because it
was used for storing <q>bullock-hides.</q></note> with the exception
of the first one alone.
</p>

<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>

<p>
4. They made a screen of linen between him and the people.
He undressed, descended, and washed. He came up and
wiped himself. They brought to him robes of gold, and he
dressed, and he sanctified his hands and feet. They brought
to him the daily offering. He cut (its throat), and another
finished the slaughter at his hand. He received the blood and
sprinkled it. He entered to offer the morning incense and to
trim the lights, and to offer the head and the members, and
the things fried in the pan, and the wine.
</p>

<p>
5. The morning incense was offered between the blood and
the members. That of the evening<note place='foot'>Literally,
between the evenings.</note> between the members
and the libations. If the High Priest were old, or delicate,
they heated for him (iron), and they put it into the cold water,
that its temperature should be changed.
</p>

<p>
6. They brought him to the house of Parva, and it was in
the Sanctuary. They divided with the screen of linen between
him and the people. He sanctified his hands and feet and undressed.
R. Meier said, he undressed and sanctified his hands
and feet, he descended and washed, he came up and he wiped
himself. They brought to him white robes, he dressed and
sanctified his hands and feet.
</p>

<p>
7. <q>In the morning he was dressed with Pelusian linen
worth twelve minas,<note place='foot'>The mina of the sanctuary was worth
about £5 14s., consequently the morning dress cost about £68 8s.</note>
and in the evening with Indian linen
worth 800 zuz.</q><note place='foot'>The zuz was worth about 6-1/2d., consequently
the evening dress cost about £21 13s. 4d.</note> The words of R. Meier. But the Sages
say, <q>that in the morning his dress was worth eighteen minas,
and in the evening twelve minas</q>; all these thirty minas were
from the congregation, and if he wished to add to them he
might add of himself.
</p>

<p>
8. He came to the side of his bullock, and the bullock was
standing between the porch and the altar; his head to the
North, and his face to the West; and the Priest stood in the
East, and his face Westward, and he placed both hands upon
him and made confession, and thus he spake, <q>I beseech thee,
O Name, I have committed iniquity. I have sinned before
Thee&mdash;I, and my house&mdash;I beseech thee, O Name,
pardon<note place='foot'>Literally, <q>cover over</q>; <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,
<q>atone for.</q></note>
now the iniquities and the transgressions and the sins which
I have perversely committed, and transgressed, and sinned
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
before thee, I, and my house, as is written in the law of Moses
thy servant, that in this day <q>He will atone for you,</q> etc. And
they answered after him, <q>BLESSED BE THE NAME.
THE HONOR OF HIS KINGDOM FOREVER AND
EVER.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
9. He came to the east of the court to the north of the
altar. The Sagan was at his right hand, and the chief of the
fathers at his left. And there were the two goats; and the urn
was there, and in it were two lots of boxwood, and Ben Gamla
made them of gold, and they commemorated him as praiseworthy.
</p>

<p>
10. The son of Katin made twelve pipes to the laver, where
before there were but two; and also he made a wheel for the
laver, lest its water should be polluted by night. Monobazus<note place='foot'>King
of Adiabene, a proselyte to
Judaism about <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 45.</note>
the king made all the handles of the vessels, of gold for the
day of atonement. Helena, his mother, made a chandelier of
gold near the door of the Sanctuary, and she also made a tablet
of gold upon which the section of the Sota<note place='foot'>The accused
woman.</note> was written.
Wonders were wrought for the doors of Nicanor,<note place='foot'>See
Treatise on <ref target="talmud_measurements_chap_ii_3"><q>Measurements,</q>
ii. 3</ref>, note.</note> and they were commemorated as praiseworthy.
</p>

<p>
11. And these were in ignominy: The family of Garmu,
who were unwilling to instruct in the preparation of the show-bread.
The family of Abtinas, who were unwilling to instruct
in the preparation of incense. Hogrus, the son of Levi, knew
a tune in the chant, and was unwilling to instruct. The son
of Kamzar was unwilling to instruct in the art of writing.
Concerning the former it is said, <q>The memory of the just is
blessed</q>; and concerning the latter it is said, <q>but the name
of the wicked shall rot</q> (Prov. x. 7).
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV</head>

<p>
1. He shook the urn and brought up two lots; one was
written <q>for the Name,</q> and the other was written <q>for
Azazel.</q><note place='foot'>A. V. <q>Scapegoat,</q> or for the
<q>devil.</q> Others translate <q>wholly put away</q> in reference to the sins of the
people, or for <q>the hard mountain,</q> and others the <q>demon of dry places.</q>
Some, however, think Azazel to be the fallen angel mentioned in the Book of
Enoch, and identical with Sammael, the angel of death. Symmachus translates
<q>the goat that departs.</q> Theodotion translates <q>the goat sent away.</q>
Aquila, <q>the goat set free.</q> The LXX. and Josephus understand by the
term <q>the averter of ills,</q> and the Vulgate <q>caper emissarius.</q></note>
The Sagan stood at his right hand, and the Chief
of the Fathers at his left. If <q>for the Name</q> came up in his
right hand the Sagan said to him, <q>My Lord High Priest, lift
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
up thy right hand</q>; and if <q>for the Name</q> came up in his
left the Chief of the Fathers said to him, <q>My Lord High
Priest, lift up thy left hand.</q> He placed them upon the two
goats, and said, <q>for the Lord is the sin-offering.</q> R. Ismael
said, <q>it was not necessary to mention the sin-offering</q> but
<q>for the Lord.</q> And they answered after him, <q>BLESSED
BE THE NAME. THE HONOR OF HIS KINGDOM
FOREVER AND EVER.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. He twisted a tongue<note place='foot'>A tongue-shaped piece of scarlet
wool.</note> of brightness on the head of the
goat to be sent away, and he placed him opposite the gate
from whence he should be sent. And the one for slaughter
he placed opposite the slaughter-house. He himself came beside
his bullock the second time, and laid his two hands upon
him and made confession, and thus he spake: <q>I beseech
Thee, O Name, I have committed iniquity, I have transgressed,
I have sinned before Thee. I, and my house, and
the sons of Aaron, Thy holy people. I beseech Thee, O Name,
pardon iniquities, transgressions, and sins which I have perversely
committed, and transgressed, and sinned before Thee,
I, and my house, and the sons of Aaron, Thy holy people, as
is written in the law of Moses, Thy servant, saying, that in
this day he will atone for you to purify you from all your sins
<q>Before the LORD. Ye shall be pure.</q></q> And they answered
after him, <q>BLESSED BE THE NAME. THE HONOR
OF HIS KINGDOM FOREVER AND EVER.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. He slaughtered him and caught his blood in a bowl, and
he gave it to him who mixed it upon the fourth platform of
the Sanctuary, that it might not congeal. He took the censer,
and went up to the top of the altar, and raked the live coals
here and there, and gathered out from the inner embers. And
went down and placed it upon the fourth platform in the
court.
</p>

<p>
4. Every day he gathered out the coals with one of silver
and poured them out into one of gold, but to-day he gathered
them with one of gold and he entered with it. Every day he
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
gathered them out with one of four cabs<note place='foot'>A
cab contained 2.8333 pints.</note> and poured them
into one of three cabs. But to-day he gathered them out
with one of three cabs, and with it he entered. Rabbi Joseph
said, <q>every day he gathered out with one containing a seah,<note place='foot'>A
seah contained one peck and one pint.</note>
and poured it into one of three cabs. But to-day he gathered
out with one of three cabs, and with it he entered. Every
day it was heavy, but to-day it was light. Every day its handle
was short, but to-day long. Every day it was green gold;
to-day red.</q> The words of Rabbi Menachem. <q>Every day
he offered half a pound in the morning, and half a pound in
the evening, but to-day he added his handful. Every day it
was fine; but to-day the finest of the fine.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. Every day the priests went up the ascent (to the altar)
in the east and descended in the west. But to-day the High
Priest went up in the middle and descended in the middle. R.
Judah said, <q>The High Priest ever went up in the middle and
descended in the middle.</q> Every day the High Priest sanctified
his hands and his feet from the laver; but to-day from
the golden basin. R. Judah said, <q>The High Priest ever
sanctified his hands and his feet from the golden basin.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. <q>Every day there were there four rows<note place='foot'>On
the altar.</note> of hearths; but
to-day five,</q> the words of R. Meier. Rabbi Joseph said,
<q>every day three; but to-day four.</q> Rabbi Judah said, <q>every
day two; but to-day three.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V</head>

<p>
1. They brought out for him the cup and the censer, and
filled his hand full (of incense), and put it into the cup, the
large according to his largeness,<note place='foot'>The size of the priest's hands was
proportionate to his stature.</note> and the smaller according
to his smallness, and so was its measure. He took the censer
in his right hand, and the spoon in his left. He proceeded in
the Sanctuary until he came between the two vails dividing
between the holy and the holy of holies, and intermediate was
a cubit. R. Joseph said, <q>there was one vail only,</q> as He
said, <q>the vail is the division for you between the Holy and the
Holy of Holies</q> (Exod. xxvi. 33). Outside it was looped
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
up southward, inside northward. He proceeded between them
till he reached the north. When he reached the north his face
was turned southward. He proceeded leftward near the vail
till he came to the ark. When he came to the ark, he put the
censer between its two staves, he heaped the incense on the
live coals, and the whole house was entirely filled with smoke.
He went out, and returned by the way of his entrance, and he
offered a short prayer in the outer house, and he did not prolong
his prayer, lest he should excite terror<note place='foot'>That
he had been struck dead.</note> in Israel.
</p>

<p>
2. When the ark was removed, a stone was there from the
days of the first prophets, and it was called
<q>FOUNDATION.</q><note place='foot'>Supposed by some to be the
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sukhrah</hi> in the present Mosque of OMAR.
From its position, however, it seems more probably to have been the foundation
of the altar of burnt-offerings. This sacred rock is sixty feet across and
five feet high. It is pierced quite through, to allow, as some think, the
blood of the sacrifices to flow off into the <q>Noble Cave</q> and the canals beneath
it.</note> It was three digits high above the earth, and upon
it he put the censer.
</p>

<p>
3. He took the blood from the mixer.<note place='foot'>A priest
continued to stir the blood to prevent its coagulation.</note> With it he entered
to the place where he entered, and stood in the place where he
stood. He sprinkled of it once on high, and seven times below,
and he did not purpose to sprinkle neither on high nor
below, but unintentionally,<note place='foot'>Or, <q>as a thrasher.</q></note>
and so he counted, <q>one, one and
one, one and two, one and three, one and four, one and five,
one and six, one and seven.</q> He went out and placed it on
the golden pedestal, which was in the Sanctuary.
</p>

<p>
4. They brought to him the goat, he slaughtered it and
caught his blood in a bowl. He entered to the place where
he entered, and stood in the place where he stood, and sprinkled
of it once on high and seven times below, and he did not purpose
to sprinkle neither on high nor below, but unintentionally;<note place='foot'>Or, <q>as
a thrasher.</q></note> and so he counted, <q>one, one and one, one and two,</q>
etc. He went out, and placed it on the second pedestal, which
was in the Sanctuary. R. Judah said <q>there was but one
pedestal only.</q> He took the blood of the bullock and laid
down the blood of the goat, and sprinkled of it on the vail
opposite the ark, on the outside, once on high, seven times
below, and he did not purpose, etc., and so he counted. He
took the blood of the goat and laid down the blood of the
bullock, and sprinkled of it on the vail opposite the ark, on
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
the outside, once on high and seven times below, etc. He
poured the blood of the bullock into the blood of the goat,
and infused the full into the empty.
</p>

<p>
5. And he went out to the altar which is before the LORD.
This was the golden altar. He began cleansing it, and went
down. <q>From what place did he begin?</q> <q>From the
Northeastern corner, the Northwestern, Southwestern, and
Southeastern, the place where he began with the sin-offering
of the outer altar, at the same place he finished upon the inner
altar.</q> R. Eliezer said, <q>he stood in his place and cleansed,
and in general he operated from below upward, excepting that
which was before him, on that he operated from above downward.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. He sprinkled on the middle<note place='foot'>Or, <q>the clean
place.</q></note> of the altar seven times,
and the remainder of the blood he poured out on the western
foundation of the outer altar, and the blood from the outer
altar he poured out on the southern foundation. This and
that commingled in the channel, and flowed out to the Kidron
Valley, and they were sold to the gardeners for manure, and
they became guilty<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>,
the gardeners became liable for a trespass-offering.</note> in themselves.
</p>

<p>
7. All work of the day of atonement is described in order.
If the High Priest performed one before the other, he did nothing.
If the blood of the goat be sprinkled before the blood
of the bullock, he must return, and sprinkle from the blood of
the goat after the blood of the bullock. And if he had not
finished the performances within, the blood was spilled. He
must bring other blood, and return to sprinkle first from within.
And so in the Sanctuary, and so in the golden altar, because
all are an atonement in themselves. R. Eleazar and R.
Simon say, <q>from the place where he stopped there he began.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI</head>

<p>
1. Both he-goats for the day of atonement are commanded
to be alike in color, and in stature, and in price, and to be
selected at the same time, and although they be not equal, yet
are they lawful. <q>If one be selected to-day and the other tomorrow?</q>
<q>They are lawful.</q> <q>If one of them died?</q>
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
If he died before the lot be cast, the priest shall take a pair
for the second; and if after the lot be cast he die, the priest
shall fetch another pair, and cast the lot over them anew. And
he shall say, <q>if that for the Name die, this over which this lot
comes will be a substitute for the Name; and if that for Azazel
die, this over which this lot comes will be a substitute for Azazel.</q>
And the second shall go to pasture, until he become
blemished, and he shall be sold, and his price must be put into
the offertory. Since the sin-offering of the congregation dies
not. R. Judah said, <q>thou shalt die</q>;<note place='foot'>R. Judah
addresses in imagination the goat.</note> and again said R.
Judah, <q>is his blood shed?</q> <q>The one to be sent forth shall
die.</q> <q>Has the one to be sent forth died?</q> <q>His blood
shall be shed.</q>
</p>

<anchor id="talmud_atonement_chap_vi_2"/>
<p>
2. The high priest came to the side of the goat to be sent
forth, and he placed his two hands<note place='foot'>It seems, according to the Talmud,
that there was no <q>laying on of hands</q> on either the morning or evening sacrifice;
or on any other public sacrifice, excepting the scapegoat and the bullock,
when the congregation had sinned through ignorance.</note> on him and made confession,
and thus he spake: <q>I beseech Thee, O Name, Thy
people, the house of Israel, have done perversely, have transgressed
and sinned before Thee. I beseech Thee, O Name,
pardon now their perverse doings, and their transgressions,
and their sins, which they have perversely committed, and
transgressed, and sinned before thee. Thy people the house
of Israel, as is written in the law of Moses Thy servant, saying,
<q>For on that day shall he make an atonement for you to cleanse
you from all your sins; before the LORD ye shall be pure.</q><note place='foot'>Lev.
xvi. 30.</note> And the priests and the people who stood in the court, on hearing
the Name clearly pronounced by the mouth of the High
Priest, knelt and worshipped, and fell on their faces and said,
<q>BLESSED BE THE NAME. THE HONOR OF HIS
KINGDOM FOREVER AND EVER.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
3. They delivered (the goat) to his conductor. All were
eligible for conducting him. But the great priests made a
rule, and they did not permit Israel to lead him forth. Said
R. Joseph, <q>it occurred that Arsela of Zippori led him forth,
and he was an Israelite.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. And they made steps<note place='foot'>Or viaduct, or causeway.</note>
for him by reason of the Babylonians,<note place='foot'>Supposed to be Alexandrine Jews,
so called from hatred to the Babylonians.</note>
who plucked off his hair and said to him, <q>take and go,
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
take and go.</q> The nobles of Jerusalem escorted him to the
first booth. There were ten booths from Jerusalem to Zuk,<note place='foot'>Zuk
is supposed by Lieutenant Conder of the Palestine Exploration
Fund to be the modern el Mûntâr, about six and a half miles east of Jerusalem
in the direction of the Dead Sea, and on the way to the ruins of Mird
(Mons Mardes). A well near the place is still called Bir es Sûk.</note>&mdash;ninety
stadia&mdash;seven and a half to every mile.
</p>

<p>
5. At every booth they said to him, <q>there is food, there is
water,</q> and they escorted him from booth to booth, except
the last. For they came not with him to Zuk, but stood afar
off and saw his acts.
</p>

<p>
6. <q>What did he do?</q> <q>His conductor divided the tongue
of brightness (iv. 2). Half he twisted on the rock, and half
he twisted between his horns. And he thrust him backward,
and the goat rolled, and descended, and he had not reached
to the half of the mountain, till his members were made
members.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, broken to pieces.</note>
He returned and sat under the last booth until darkness
set in.</q> <q>And when did he render garments unclean?</q><note place='foot'>Maimonides
says that those connected with the red heifer and scapegoat
were rendered unclean because these animals were <q>sin-bearing</q> animals.
All that Israelites now have to offer on the day of atonement is for
males a white cock (because gever in Hebrew signifies a man and a cock),
and for females a hen. And they pray, <q>Let this be my substitute&mdash;this my
atonement. This cock goeth to death, but may I be gathered and enter into
a long and happy life, and into peace.</q></note>
<q>From his exit from the wall of Jerusalem.</q> R. Simon said,
<q>from the time of his thrusting at Zuk.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. The High Priest came beside the bullock and he-goat
which were to be burned. He cleft them, and brought out
their entrails. He put them on a dish, and caused them to
smoke upon the altar. He folded them in their skins, and
caused them to be carried to the place of burning. <q>And when
did he render garments unclean?</q> <q>From his proceeding
without the wall of the court.</q> R. Simon said, <q>when the fire
kindled on the greatest part</q> (of the sacrifice).
</p>

<p>
8. They said to the High Priest, <q>the he-goat has arrived in
the wilderness.</q> <q>And whence knew they that the he-goat
had arrived in the wilderness?</q> <q>They set watchmen, who
waved handkerchiefs, and they knew that the he-goat had arrived
in the wilderness.</q> Said R. Judah, <q>and was not this a
great sign to them? from Jerusalem to Bethhoron<note place='foot'><q>Place
of the hollow.</q></note> there were
three miles. They went a mile and returned, and rested the time
of a mile, and they knew that the he-goat arrived in the desert.</q>
R. Ishmael<note place='foot'>Bereitha, or External Traditions.</note>
said, <q>and was there not another sign to them?</q>
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
A tongue of brightness was twisted on the door of the Sanctuary,
and when the he-goat arrived in the wilderness the tongue
blanched, as is said, <q>Though your sins be as scarlet, they
shall be white as snow.</q><note place='foot'>Isaiah i. 18.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VII</head>

<p>
1. The High Priest came to read. If he wished to read in
linen garments, he read. If not, he read in his own white stole.
The public Minister of the congregation took out the roll
of the Law, and delivered it to the Chief of the congregation,
and the Chief of the congregation gave it to the Sagan, and
the Sagan gave it to the High Priest. And the High Priest
stood and received it and read. He stood and read <q>after the
death</q><note place='foot'>Lev. xvi.</note> and <q>also on the
tenth day.</q><note place='foot'>Lev. xxiii. 27.</note> And he rolled up the
book of the Law, and put it into his bosom, and said, <q>More
than what I have read before you is written here.</q> And <q>on
the tenth</q><note place='foot'>Num. xxix. 7.</note> in the
Pentateuch of overseers he recited, and
pronounced upon it eight blessings; upon the Law, and upon
the Service, and upon the confession, and upon the forgiveness
of sins, and upon the Sanctuary separately, and upon
Israel separately, and upon Jerusalem separately, and upon the
Priests separately, and upon the remainder of the prayer.
</p>

<p>
2. He who saw the High Priest, when he read, could not
see the bullock and the he-goat, when they were burning.
And he who saw the bullock and the he-goat, when they were
burning, could not see the High Priest, when he read. Not
because it was forbidden, but because the way was far, and the
work of both was proceeding at once.
</p>

<p>
3. If he read in linen garments, he sanctified his hands and
his feet, he undressed, he descended and bathed. He came up,
and wiped himself. They brought him golden garments, and
he dressed, and he sanctified his hands and his feet, and went
forth and offered the ram for himself, and the ram for the
people, and seven lambs without blemish of a year old. The
words of R. Eleazar. R. Akiba said, <q>with the morning sacrifice
they were offered.</q> And the bullock of burnt-offering and
the he-goat,<note place='foot'>Num. xxix. 7.</note> which was
prepared without, were offered with
the evening sacrifice.
</p>

<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>

<p>
4. He purified his hands and his feet, and undressed, and
washed, and he came up, and wiped himself. They brought
to him white garments, and he dressed, and sanctified his hands
and his feet. He entered to bring forth the spoon and the
censer, he sanctified his hands and his feet, and undressed, and
he descended, and washed. He came up, and wiped himself.
They brought to him garments of gold, and he dressed, and
sanctified his hands and his feet. And he entered to offer the
evening incense, and to trim the lights; and he sanctified his
hands and his feet, and he dressed. They brought to him his
own garments, and he dressed. And they escorted him to his
house. And he made a feast-day for his friends, when he went
out in peace from the Sanctuary.
</p>

<p>
5. The High Priest ministered in eight vestments. And the
ordinary priest in four, in the tunic, and drawers, and bonnet,
and girdle. To these, the High Priest added the breast-plate,
and ephod, and robe, and (golden) plate. In these they inquired
by Urim and Thummim.<note place='foot'>Urim and Thummin (lights and perfections),
the Jews think, gave answer by the divine illumination of the suitable
letters composing the names of the tribes which were graven on the breastplate
of the High Priest.</note> And they did not inquire
in them for a private person; only for the King and the great
Sanhedrin, and for whomsoever the congregation is necessary.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VIII</head>

<p>
1. On the day of atonement, food, and drink, and washing,
and anointing, and the sandal latchet,<note place='foot'>Sandals were, however, allowed
where there was fear of serpents and scorpions. Woollen socks might be
used.</note> and marriage duties,
are restricted. <q>But the king and bride are allowed to wash
their face, and the woman after childbirth may wear sandals.</q>
The words of R. Eleazar, but the Sages forbid them.
</p>

<p>
2. The person who eats the size of a big date and its grain,
and drinks a jawful, is liable to punishment. All edible things
are united for the measure of the date, and all drinkable things
are united for the measure of the jawful. Eating and drinking
are not united.
</p>

<p>
3. He who eats and drinks unwittingly, is only liable for
one sin-offering. If he eat and work, he is liable for two sin-offerings.
He who eats what is disagreeable for food, and
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
drinks what is disagreeable for drinking, and he who drinks
fish brine, or salt gravy, is free.
</p>

<p>
4. They do not afflict young children in the day of atonement,
but they coax them one or two years before, that they
may be accustomed to the commandments.
</p>

<p>
5. If the pregnant woman be affected by the odor, they give
her food, till her strength return. To the sick person they
give food by order from the physicians. If there be no physicians,
they give him food at his own demand until he say,
<q>it is enough.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. Him who is affected with blindness, they fed even with
unclean things, till his eyes got the power of vision. Him
who is bitten by a mad dog, they fed not with the caul of his
liver. But R. Mathia Ben Charash said, <q>it is allowed</q>; and
again said R. Mathia Ben Charash, <q>to him who had throat
complaint they administered medicine in his mouth on the
Sabbath day, since there is uncertainty of life, and all uncertainty
of life abrogates the Sabbath.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. <q>On whomsoever an old ruin falls, if there be a doubt,
whether one be under it or not; if there be doubt, whether he
be alive or dead; if there be a doubt, whether he be a foreigner
or an Israelite?</q> <q>They open over him the heap. If they
find him alive, they open fully, but if dead, they leave him.</q>
</p>

<p>
8. The sin-offering, and the offering for known transgression
make atonement. Death and the day of atonement with
repentance make atonement. Repentance atones for light
transgressions, for commands positive and negative. But
grave offences are suspended, till the day of atonement come,
and it will atone.
</p>

<p>
9. He who said, <q>I will sin and repent&mdash;I will sin and repent?</q>
<q>They did not give him the opportunity of repentance.</q>
<q>I will sin, and the day of atonement shall atone?</q>
<q>The day of atonement makes no atonement.</q> Transgressions
between man and The Place<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>,
God omnipresent. The Jews in a spirit of reverence use the words
<q>Place</q> and the <q>Name</q> to denote God. In reading they do not now pronounce
the word Jehovah, but substitute Adonai for it; and when Jehovah
is followed by the word Adonai they then use the word Elohim. The true
pronunciation of the Name has been a subject of much contention. It has
been variously given, as Yeheveh, Yehveh, Yahveh, Yahavah, Yahaveh, and
Yehovah. When it was uttered on the Day of Atonement the worshippers <q>fell
on their faces</q> in reverence for it (<ref target="talmud_atonement_chap_vi_2">vi.
2</ref>). It was spoken for the last time in the Temple by the mouth of Simon the
Just. Henceforward, the Gemara says whoever attempts to pronounce it shall
have no part in the world to come.</note> the day of atonement expiates.
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
Transgressions between man and his neighbor, the
day of atonement does not expiate, until his companion be
reconciled. This R. Eleazar Ben Azariah explained <q>From
all thy sins before the LORD thou shalt be cleansed.</q> Transgressions
between man and The Place, the day of atonement
expiated. Transgressions between man and his companion,
the day of atonement did not expiate, until his companion be
reconciled. Said R. Akiba, <q>Happy are ye, Israel! before
whom are ye to be pure? Who will purify you? Your Father
in heaven, as is said, <q>I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and
ye shall be clean.</q></q> Then said the Fountain of Israel, the
LORD, <q>As the fountain purifies the defiled, so the Holy One,
blessed be He, purifies Israel.</q>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>On Tabernacles<note place='foot'>According to Maimonides, we have
in this treatise proof that it is coeval with the laws of Moses on the same
subject.</note></head>

<quote rend='display'>
Size and Covering of Tabernacles&mdash;What Constitutes a
Tabernacle&mdash;Exemptions&mdash;Palm
Branches&mdash;Myrtle Boughs&mdash;Willows&mdash;Citrons&mdash;Reading
and Blessing&mdash;Thrashing the Altar&mdash;Rejoicings&mdash;Pouring
Out of the Water&mdash;The Lighting and Dancing&mdash;Singing and Music&mdash;Blowing
the Trumpets&mdash;Offerings and Courses&mdash;The Course Bilgah.
</quote>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I</head>

<p>
1. A booth which is above twenty cubits high is disallowed.
R. Judah allows it. One which is not ten hands high, one
which has not three walls, or which has more sun than shade,
is disallowed. <q>An old booth?</q> <q>The school of Shammai
disallow it; but the school of Hillel allow it.</q> <q>What is an
old booth?</q> <q>One that was made thirty days before the
feast; but if it were made with intention for the feast, even
from the beginning of the year, it is allowed.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. <q>If a man make his booth beneath a tree?</q> <q>It is as
though he made it in the house.</q> <q>If one booth be above
another?</q> <q>The upper one is allowed; but the lower one is
disallowed.</q> R. Judah says, <q>if they cannot inhabit the upper
one, the lower one is allowed.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. <q>If one spread a cloth over (its roof)<note place='foot'>The cloth would change it
into a tent.</note> on account of
the sun; or under (its roof) on account of the falling leaves;
or if one spread a canopy over his bed?</q> <q>It is disallowed.
But he may spread a cloth over two bedposts.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. <q>If one have trained a vine, or a gourd, or ivy, and covered
it over?</q> <q>It is disallowed. But if the covering be
larger than these, or if they have been trimmed, it is allowed.</q>
The rule is, everything which contracts uncleanness, and does
not grow from the ground, must not be used for a covering;
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
but everything which does not contract uncleanness, and grows
from the ground, may be used for a covering.
</p>

<p>
5. Bundles of straw, and bundles of wood, and bundles of
twigs, must not be used for covering. But all of them, if untied,
are allowed. And all of them are allowed for side walls.
</p>

<p>
6. <q>They may cover it with laths.</q> The words of R. Judah;
but R. Meier forbids it. <q>If one put a board four hands wide
over it?</q> <q>It is allowed, provided he do not sleep under it.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. <q>Rafters over which there is no ceiling?</q> R. Judah
says, <q>the school of Shammai say, <q>let him loosen them, and
remove the middle one out of three.</q> But the school of Hillel
say, <q>he may either loosen them, or remove the middle one
out of every three.</q></q> R. Meier says, <q>he must remove the
middle one out of every three, but he need not loosen them.</q>
</p>

<p>
8. <q>If one roof in his booth with spits, or bed-boards?</q>
<q>If the intermediate spaces be equal to them, it is allowed.</q>
<q>If one pile up loose sheaves to make a booth?</q> <q>It is no
booth.</q>
</p>

<p>
9. <q>If one interweave the side walls from above downwards?</q>
<q>If they be three hand-breadths high from the
ground, it is disallowed.</q> <q>If from the ground upwards they
be ten hand-breadths high?</q> <q>It is allowed.</q> R. José says,
<q>even as from the ground upward ten hand-breadths (are required),
so likewise from the roof downward, ten hand-breadths
(are required).</q> <q>If the covering be three hand-breadths
above the side walls?</q> <q>It is disallowed.</q>
</p>

<p>
10. <q>If a house be unroofed and covered over?</q> <q>If there
be a space of four cubits between the wall and the covering,
it is disallowed: also a court, in which there is an enclosed
passage.</q> <q>If the large booth be enclosed with covering,
which must not be used, and if there be below it a space of
four cubits?</q> <q>It is disallowed.</q>
</p>

<p>
11. <q>If one make his booth like a pyramid; or lean it against
a wall?</q> R. Eleazar <q>disallows it, because it has no roof</q>;
but the Sages <q>allow it.</q> <q>A large reed mat, which has been
made for sleeping purposes?</q> <q>It contracts uncleanness, and
they must not cover with it.</q> <q>If made for covering purposes?</q>
<q>They may use it; and it contracts no uncleanness.</q>
R. Eleazar says, <q>whether large or small, if made for sleeping,
it contracts uncleanness, and must not be used for covering;
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
but if made for covering, they may cover with it, and it contracts
no uncleanness.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II</head>

<p>
1. <q>If one sleep under a bed in the booth?</q> <q>He has
not discharged his duty.</q> R. Judah said, <q>we used to sleep
under a bed before the elders, and they said nothing to us.</q>
R. Simon said, <q>it happened that Tabbi, the slave of R.
Gamaliel, used to sleep under a bed, and R. Gamaliel said to
the elders, <q>you have seen my slave Tabbi, he is a disciple of
the Sages, and knows that slaves are exempted from the booth,
therefore he sleeps under a bedstead.</q> From this we in our
way infer that he who sleeps under a bed has not discharged
his duty.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. <q>If a man support his booth with the posts of his bed?</q>
<q>It is allowed.</q> R. Judah says, <q>a booth which cannot stand
by itself, is disallowed.</q> A booth, which is unequally covered,
and its shade greater than its sunlight, is allowed. If the
covering be thick like a house roof, even though the stars
are not seen through it, it is allowed.
</p>

<p>
3. <q>If one make his booth on the top of a wagon, or on
a boat?</q> <q>It is allowed; and he may go up to it on the
festival.</q> <q>If one make it on the top of a tree, or on the
back of a camel?</q> <q>It is allowed, but he must not go up to
it on the festival.</q><note place='foot'>But he may go up on the
middle days of the feast.</note> <q>If two sides (be formed) by a tree, and
one by the hands of man, or two by the hands of man and
one by a tree?</q> <q>The booth is allowed, but he must not
go up to it on the festival.</q> <q>If three (sides be formed) by
hands of man and the fourth by a tree?</q> <q>The booth is
allowed, and he may go up to it on the festival.</q> This is
the rule&mdash;when, on the removal of the tree, it can stand by
itself, the booth is allowed, and one may go up to it on the
festival.
</p>

<p>
4. <q>If one make his booth between trees, and the trees
form side walls?</q> <q>The booth is allowed.</q> Messengers on
a pious errand are exempted from the booth. The sick and
their attendants are exempted from the booth. Persons may
occasionally eat or drink outside the booth.
</p>

<p>
5. It happened that they brought to R. Jochanan, son of
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
Zachai, a dish to taste, and to Rabban Gamaliel two dates
and a jar of water, and they said, <q>bring them to the booth.</q>
But when they brought to R. Zadok food smaller than an
egg, he took it in the napkin<note place='foot'>Lest he should render the food
legally unclean with his unwashed hands. Mark vii. 2, 5.</note>
and ate it outside the booth,
but he did not say a blessing after it.
</p>

<p>
6. R. Eleazar says, <q>a man is bound to eat fourteen meals
in the booth, one by day and one by night</q>; but the Sages
say the matter is not determined, except on the first night of
the festival. Moreover R. Eleazar said, <q>he who has not taken
his meal on the first night of the festival, may complete it on
the last night of the festival; but the Sages say that he must
not complete it, and for this it is said, <q>(That which is) crooked
cannot be made straight, and that which is wanting, cannot
be numbered.</q></q><note place='foot'>Eccles. i. 15.</note>
</p>

<p>
7. <q>If anyone's head, and the greater part of his body, be
in the booth, and his table in the house?</q> The school of
Shammai <q>disallow it</q>; but the school of Hillel <q>allow it.</q>
The school of Hillel said to the school of Shammai, <q>did it
not happen that the elders of the school of Shammai, and those
of the school of Hillel, went to visit R. Jochanan, son of
Hachorni, and they found him sitting with his head and the
greater part of his body in the booth while his table was in
the house, and they said nothing to him?</q> The school of
Shammai said to them, <q>Is that a proof? Even the elders
did say to him, <q>if such has been thy custom, thou hast never
in thy life fulfilled the commandment of the booth.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
8. Women, slaves, and children, are exempted from the
booth. A boy who no longer needs his mother is bound to
the booth. It happened that the daughter-in-law of Shammai,
the elder,<note place='foot'>He lived about eighty years before
the destruction of the Temple.</note> gave birth to a son, and Shammai removed the
ceiling and covered over her bed on account of the little one.
</p>

<p>
9. During the whole seven days a man is to make the booth
his regular dwelling, and (to use) his house only occasionally.
<q>If rain fall, when is it permitted to remove from it?</q> <q>When
the porridge is spoiled.</q> The elders illustrate this by an example:
<q>To what is the matter like?</q> <q>It is as if a servant
pour out a cup for his master, who in return dashes a bowlful in
his face.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III</head>

<p>
1. A palm branch stolen or withered is disallowed. One
from an idolatrous grove, or from a city withdrawn to idolatry,<note place='foot'>Deut.
xiii. 13.</note> is disallowed. If the point be broken off, or the leaves torn off,
it is disallowed. If they be only parted, it is allowed. R. Judah
says, <q>it must be tied together at the top.</q> Short-leaved
palms from the Iron Mount<note place='foot'>Supposed to be the mountain east
of the Dead Sea, above Callirrhoe.</note> are allowed. A palm branch
measuring three hands, sufficient to shake it by, is allowed.
</p>

<p>
2. A myrtle bough stolen, or withered, is disallowed. One
from an idolatrous grove, or from a city withdrawn to idolatry,
is disallowed. If the point be broken off, or the leaves torn
off, or if it have more berries than leaves, it is disallowed. But
if the berries be lessened it is allowed; but they must not diminish
them on the festival.
</p>

<p>
3. A willow of the brook stolen, or withered, is disallowed.
One from an idolatrous grove, or from a town withdrawn to
idolatry, is disallowed. If the point be broken off, or the
leaves torn off, or if it be a mountain willow, it is disallowed.
One faded, or from which some leaves have dropped off, or
which has grown on dry ground, is allowed.
</p>

<p>
4. R. Ishmael says, <q>three myrtle boughs, two willows, one
palm branch, and one citron, even if two out of the three myrtle
boughs have their points broken off.</q> R. Tarphon says, <q>even
if three have their points broken off.</q> R. Akivah says, <q>even
as there is one citron and one palm branch, so there is one
myrtle bough and one willow.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. A citron stolen or withered is disallowed. One from an
idolatrous grove, or from a city withdrawn to idolatry, is disallowed.
One off an uncircumcised tree<note place='foot'>Lev. xix. 23.</note> is disallowed. One
from an unclean heave-offering<note place='foot'>Num. xviii. 11, 12.</note>
is disallowed. From the
clean heave-offering one is not to take a citron, but if it be
taken, it is allowed. <q>One from what is doubtful as to payment
of tithe?</q> The school of Shammai <q>disallow it,</q> but
the school of Hillel <q>allow it.</q> One is not to take a citron
from the second tithe in Jerusalem, but if it be taken it is
allowed.
</p>

<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>

<p>
6. If a stain spread over the greater part (of the citron),
if it have lost its crown, or its rind be peeled off, or if it be
split, or bored, or if ever so little be wanting, it is disallowed.
If a stain be spread over the smaller part of it, if it have lost
its stalk, or if it be bored so that no part however small be
wanting, it is allowed. A dusky citron is disallowed. A leek
green one R. Meier <q>allows,</q> but R. Judah <q>disallows it.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. <q>What is the (legal) size of a small citron?</q> R. Meier
says <q>like a nut.</q> R. Judah says <q>like an egg.</q> <q>And of
a large citron?</q> <q>That one can hold two in his hand,</q> the
words of R. Judah. But R. José says, <q>One if (it must be
held) in two hands.</q>
</p>

<p>
8. <q>They must only tie the palm-branch with its own kind,</q>
the words of R. Judah. But R. Meier says, <q>even with twine.</q>
R. Meier said, <q>it happened that the men of Jerusalem tied
their palm-branches with gold thread.</q> The Sages said to
him, <q>underneath they tied them with their own kind.</q>
</p>

<p>
9. <q>When did they shake the palm-branch?</q> At the beginning
and ending of <q>Oh, give thanks unto the Lord,</q><note place='foot'>Ps.
cxviii. 1.</note> and at <q>Save now, I beseech Thee, O Lord,</q><note place='foot'>Ps.
cxviii. 25.</note> the words of
the school of Hillel. But the school of Shammai say, <q>also
at <q>O Lord, I beseech Thee,</q> send now prosperity.</q><note place='foot'>Ps.
cxviii. 25.</note> R. Akivah
said, <q>I watched Rabban Gamaliel and R. Joshua; and
when all the people shook their palm-branches, they only
shook theirs at <q>Save now, I beseech Thee.</q></q> If one be on
the road, and have no palm-branch with him, he must, when
he gets home, shake it at his table. If he have not done it
in the morning, he must do it toward evening, as the whole
day is allowed for the palm-branch.
</p>

<p>
10. If the hymns<note place='foot'>Ps. cxiii. to cxviii. inclusive.</note>
be read to a man by a slave, or a woman,
or a child,<note place='foot'>These not being legally bound to
this duty cannot act as deputies for another.</note> he must
repeat after them what they read, but it
is a disgrace<note place='foot'>His ignorance of reading.</note>
to him. If a grown-up man read it to him,
he must repeat after him, Hallelujah.
</p>

<p>
11. In a place where it is the custom to repeat,<note place='foot'><q>I
will praise thee,</q> etc.&mdash;Ps. cxviii. 21 to end.</note> a man
must repeat; to simply read, a man must simply read; to bless
after the palm-branch, a man must bless. In every case according
to the custom of the country. If a person buy a
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
palm-branch from his neighbor during the Sabbatical year,
he must give him a citron as a gift, for it is not permitted to
buy a citron during the Sabbatical year.
</p>

<p>
12. At first the palm-branch was used in the Sanctuary
seven days, and in the country one day. But after the Sanctuary
was destroyed, R. Jochanan, the son of Zachai, decreed,
<q>that in the country the palm-branch should be used seven
days, in memory of the Sanctuary.</q> He at the same time
also decreed, <q>that on the day of the wave-sheaf<note place='foot'>Lev.
xxiii. 10, 11.</note> it should
be unlawful to eat new grain.</q>
</p>

<p>
13. If the first day of the feast fall on a Sabbath, all the
people are to bring their palm-branches (beforehand) to the
Synagogue. In the morning they come early, and each man
must distinguish his own palm-branch, and take it, for the
Sages say, <q>that a man cannot discharge his duty on the first
day of the feast by means of his neighbor's palm-branch, but
on the other days of the feast he may discharge his duty by
means of his neighbor's palm-branch.</q>
</p>

<p>
14. R. José says, <q>if the first day of the feast fall on the
Sabbath, and a man forget, and carry his palm-branch out on
the public common, he is absolved, because he carried it out
with permission.</q><note place='foot'>Permission arising out
of his intention to fulfil the law.</note>
</p>

<p>
15. A woman may receive the palm-branch from the hand
of her son, or of her husband, and put it back into water on
the Sabbath. R. Judah says, <q>on the Sabbath they may put
it back; on the feast they may add water; and on the middle
days they may change the water.</q> A child who knows how
to shake, is bound to shake the palm-branch.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV</head>

<p>
1. The palm-branch and the willow (were used) for six days
and for seven. The hymn, and the rejoicings, for eight days.
The booth and the pouring out of water for seven days; and
the musical pipes for five and for six days.
</p>

<p>
2. The palm-branch (was used) for seven days. <q>How?</q>
<q>When the first day of the feast fell on a Sabbath, the palm-branch
(was used) for seven days. Otherwise all the days
were six.</q>
</p>

<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>

<p>
3. The willow (was used) for seven days. <q>How?</q>
<q>When the seventh day of the willow happened to fall on a
Sabbath, the willow (was used) for seven days. Otherwise
all the days were six.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. <q>How was the command for the palm-branch when the
first day of the feast fell on a Sabbath?</q> <q>They used to
bring their palm-branches to the mountain of the House, and
the inspectors received them, and arranged them on a bench.
But the elders placed theirs in a chamber. And the people
were taught to say, <q>Whoever takes my palm-branch in his
hand, be it his as a gift.</q> On the morrow they came early,
and the inspectors spread them before them. And they used
to snatch them and hurt each other. When the Sanhedrin
saw that persons were endangered, it was decreed that every
man should take them home.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. <q>How was the command for the willow?</q> <q>There was
a place below Jerusalem called Moza;<note place='foot'>Means a place exempt from taxation
called Colonin, perhaps the modern Colonia. Some, however, say it was a
place in the Kedron Valley.</note> thither the people went
down and gathered drooping willow-branches. And they
came and erected them at the side of the altar, with their tops
bending over the altar. They blew the trumpet, and sounded
an alarm, and blew a blast. Every day they made one circuit
round the altar, and said, <q>Save now, I beseech Thee, O Lord!
O Lord, I beseech Thee, send now prosperity.</q></q> Rabbi Judah
said, <q>I and HE save now, I beseech thee.</q><note place='foot'>Deut.
xxxii. 39.</note> On the day
itself<note place='foot'>The seventh day on which they used
the willows.</note> they made seven circuits round the altar. <q>As they
withdrew what did they say?</q> <q>Beauty is thine, O Altar!</q>
<q>Beauty is thine, O Altar!</q> R. Eleazar said, <q>To the LORD
and to thee, O Altar!</q> <q>To the LORD, and to thee, O
Altar!</q>
</p>

<p>
6. As they did on the week-days, so they did on the Sabbath,
save that they gathered the willow-boughs on the
Sabbath-eve, and put them into vases of gold, that they might
not fade. R. Joshua, son of Beroka, says, <q>they brought date-branches,
and thrashed them on the ground at the sides of
the altar</q> (others say <q>on the altar</q>). And the day itself
was called <q>the day for thrashing the branches.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. Immediately the children threw down their palm-branches,
and ate their citrons.
</p>

<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>

<p>
8. The hymn and rejoicings were for eight days. <q>How?</q>
<q>It is taught, that a man is bound to the hymn, and the rejoicings
in honor of the last day of the feast, even as on its
other days.</q> <q>How is the booth for seven days?</q> <q>When
a man has completed his eating, he is not to pull down his
booth; but after the evening sacrifice he may remove his furniture
in honor of the last day of the feast.</q>
</p>

<p>
9. <q>How was the pouring out of the water?</q> <q>A golden
pitcher holding three logs<note place='foot'>A log is about
half a pint.</note> was filled from Siloam. When
they came (with it) to the water-gate they blew the trumpet,
an alarm, and a blast. The priest then went up the ascent to
the altar, and turned to his left. Two silver basins were there.</q>
R. Judah says, <q>they were of lime, but their look was dark
from the wine.</q> And they were bored with two narrow nostrils,
one wider, the other narrower, that both might get empty
at once. <q>The one to the west was for the water; the other
to the east was for the wine; but if the water was poured into
the wine basin, or the wine into the water basin, it was allowed.</q>
R. Judah said, <q>they poured out one log on each of the eight
days.</q> To him, who poured out, they said, <q>lift your hand;</q>
for once it happened, that one poured over his feet,<note place='foot'>He
is said to have been a Sadducee who rejected tradition. Alexander Jannæus,
to show his contempt for the Pharisees, poured the water on the
ground. The people became excited, and pelted him with their ethrogs or
citrons till his body-guard interfered, and, as fighting took place, some six
thousand Jews were killed in the Temple. Josephus, <q>Antiq.,</q> book xiii.
chap. xiii. 5.</note> and all
the people pelted him to death with their citrons.
</p>

<p>
10. As they did on the week-days, so they did on the Sabbath;
save that on the Sabbath eve an unconsecrated golden
cask was filled from Siloam, and placed in a chamber. If it
were spilt or uncovered, it was refilled from the laver, as water
and wine which had been uncovered were disallowed on the
altar.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V</head>

<p>
1. The musical pipes were (played) for five and (sometimes)
six days. That is to say, the pipes of the water-drawing,
which supersedes neither the Sabbath day nor the feast. The
(Sages) said, <q>he who has not seen the joy<note place='foot'>Isa. xii. 3;
John vii. 37, 38.</note> of the water-drawing,
has never seen joy in his life.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. With the departure of the first day of the feast, they went
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
down into the women's court, and made great preparations.<note place='foot'>Galleries
were erected for the women, and the men stood below them.</note>
Four golden candlesticks were there, and four golden basins
on their tops, and four ladders to each candlestick, and four
lads from the young priests, and in their hands were jars of
oil containing 120 logs, with which they replenished each basin.
</p>

<p>
3. The cast-off breeches and belts of the priests were torn to
wicks, which they lighted. And there was not a court in Jerusalem
that was not lit up by the lights of the water-drawing.
</p>

<p>
4. Pious and experienced men danced with lighted torches
in their hands, singing hymns and lauds before them. And
the Levites accompanied them with harps, psalteries, cymbals,
trumpets, and numberless musical instruments. On the fifteen
steps which went down from the court of Israel into the
women's court, corresponding with the fifteen songs of degrees,<note place='foot'>Ps.
cxx. to cxxxiv. inclusive.</note>
stood the Levites with their musical instruments, and
sang. And at the upper gate, which went down from the
court of Israel to the court of the women, stood two priests
with trumpets in their hands. When the cock crew, they blew
a blast, an alarm, and a blast.<note place='foot'>The signal
for drawing water.</note> When they reached the tenth
step, they blew a blast, an alarm, and a blast. And when they
got into the court, they blew a blast, an alarm, and a blast.
They went on blowing as they went, until they reached the
gate, that leads out to the east. When they reached the gate,
that leads out to the east, they turned their faces westward,<note place='foot'>The
orthodox worshippers in the Temple looked toward the west, or
Holy of Holies. The Baal or Sun worshippers turned toward the east, and
used the eastward position. Under the Christian dispensation believers are directed
to look to Jesus, who promises to be in their midst (Matt. xviii. 20).</note>
and said,
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Our fathers, who were in this place,</q></l>
<l>Turned their backs upon the Temple;</l>
<l>And their faces toward the east,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>And worshipped the sun eastward.</q><note place='foot'>Ezek.
viii. 16.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
R. Judah says, they repeated again and again,
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>But we unto the LORD;</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>To the LORD are our eyes.</q><note place='foot'>This is
one of the very few specimens of Hebrew poetry, apart from
Scripture (dating prior to the destruction of the temple), which have come
down to us.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
5. In the sanctuary they did not blow the trumpet less than
twenty-one times, nor oftener than forty-eight times. Every
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>
day they blew the trumpet twenty-one times, thrice at opening
the gates, nine times at the daily offering of the morning,
and nine times at the daily offering of the evening. When
there were additional offerings they blew nine times more.
On the eve of the Sabbath they again blew six times; thrice
to interdict the people from work, and thrice to separate the
holy from the ordinary day. But on the eve of the Sabbath
during the feast they blew forty-eight times: thrice at the
opening of the gates, thrice at the upper gate, thrice at the
lower gate, thrice at the water-drawing, thrice over the altar,
nine times at the daily offering of the morning, nine times
at the daily offering of the evening, nine times at the additional
offerings, thrice to interdict the people from work, and thrice
to separate the holy from the ordinary day.
</p>

<p>
6. On the first day of the feast there were thirteen bullocks,
two rams, and one goat. There then remained fourteen lambs
for eight courses of priests.<note place='foot'>The priesthood was divided into
twenty-four courses (1 Chron. xxiv. 7-19). During the feast all the courses
ministered, and, as each day the number of bullocks was decreased by one, the
lambs were redistributed so as to supply an offering for every course.</note>
On the first day six courses
offered two lambs each, and the other (two) courses one lamb
each. On the second day five courses offered two lambs each,
and the remaining (four) courses one lamb each. On the
third day four courses offered two lambs each, and the remaining
six one lamb each. On the fourth day three courses
offered two lambs each, and the remaining eight one lamb
each. On the fifth day two courses offered two lambs each,
and the remaining ten one lamb each. On the sixth day one
course offered two lambs, and the remaining twelve one lamb
each. On the seventh day they were all equal. On the eighth
day they cast lots, as on other feasts. They said, <q>that the
order which offered bullocks to-day, was not permitted to offer
bullocks to-morrow.</q> But they changed in rotation.
</p>

<p>
7. Three times in the year all the courses shared alike in
the offerings of the great feasts, and in the distribution of the
showbread. In the Solemn Assembly<note place='foot'>In the feast of weeks there
were two leavened wave loaves (Lev. xxiii. 17).</note> they say to each priest,
<q>Here is unleavened bread for thee, and here is leavened
for thee.</q> The course in regular succession offered the daily
sacrifices, vows, and free-will offerings, and all the other sacrifices
and services of the congregation. If a feast be next to
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
the Sabbath, either before or after it, all the courses shared
alike in the distribution of the showbread.
</p>

<p>
8. <q>But if a day intervene between the two?</q> <q>The
course in regular succession took ten loaves, and the loiterers<note place='foot'>Those
priests who were slow in attendance, as they were obliged to share
their perquisites with the whole priesthood.</note>
took two.</q> At other times of the year, the course entering on
duty took six loaves, and the course going off duty took six.
R. Judah says, <q>the course entering took seven, and that going
off took five.</q> Those entering shared them on the north side
(of the temple court), and those going out on the south side.
The course Bilgah always shared theirs on the south side. But
their slaughter-ring was fastened down, and the window of
their closet was shut up.<note place='foot'>The course Bilgah was fifteenth (1
Chron. xxiv. 14). Each course had a ring to which the heads of the victims
were tied, and also a closet for stores. These were taken from the course Bilgah
as a mark of disgrace. During the persecution of Antiochus, Miriam, a
daughter of Bilgah, married a Syro-Grecian husband. When the Greeks
took the Temple, she struck the altar with her shoe, exclaiming, <q>O wolf,
wolf, how long art thou to consume the wealth of Israel, and canst not preserve
them in their hour of need!</q> It was supposed that she must have learned
something evil in her father's house, and the whole course was therefore degraded.
The Rabbis say that the courses of the priests were first ordained
by Moses, and that he established eight of them. Four courses he assigned to
the line of Eleazar, and four he assigned to the line of Ithamar. Samuel is said
to have added eight courses more, and the remaining eight were added by
David. The Scriptures, however, assert that David arranged the whole twenty-four
courses. This arrangement continued till the captivity. After the captivity
only four courses returned&mdash;namely Jedaiah, Harim, Pashur, and
Immer. The Babylon Talmud mentions Jojarib instead of Harim. To restore
again the number of courses, twenty-four lots were cast into a box, and each
head of the four courses, which returned, drew six lots&mdash;one for himself,
and five for the courses which they wished to revive. The restored order
of courses continued as of old, except in the case of Jojarib, who yielded the
first rank to Jedaiah, as Jedaiah was of the family of the High-priest Joshua, the
son of Jozedek. They soon increased in numbers, and we read that each
course kept a station of 2,400 priests at Jerusalem, and half a station at Jericho.
The lesser number was stationed at Jericho to give honor to Jerusalem.</note>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The New Year</head>

<quote rend='display'>
Four New Years&mdash;Judgments&mdash;New
Moon&mdash;Witnesses&mdash;Evidence&mdash;Samaritans&mdash;Spreading
the News&mdash;Beth Yangzek&mdash;Examining Witnesses&mdash;Rabban
Gamaliel's Plan of the Phases of the Moon&mdash;Rabbi
Joshua&mdash;Sanhedrin&mdash;Cornets and Trumpets&mdash;Intention&mdash;The Serpent
of Brass&mdash;Jerusalem and Jamnia&mdash;Blessings&mdash;Texts of Scripture&mdash;How
the Trumpets are to be Blown.
</quote>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I</head>

<p>
1. There are four new years. The first of Nisan<note place='foot'>Nisan answered to
part of March and April. The reign of kings was
counted from this month, so that if a king began to reign in Adar (February
and March), in the following Nisan he would be reckoned to have reigned two
years.</note> is a new year for kings and for festivals.<note place='foot'>The
passover was the first of the three feasts, beyond which one could
not neglect a vow.</note> The first of Elul<note place='foot'>Part of August
and September.</note> is a new
year for the tithing of cattle; but R. Eleazar and R. Simeon
say, <q>it is on the first of Tishri.</q><note place='foot'>Part of September and
October.</note> The first of Tishri is a
new year for civil years, for years of release, and for jubilees,
also for planting of trees<note place='foot'>Lev. xix. 23-25.</note> and herbs. The
first of Sebat is
a new year for (the tithing of) trees according to the school of
Shammai, but the school of Hillel say, <q>on its fifteenth.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. The world is judged at four periods: at the passover,
for the growth of corn; at Pentecost, for the fruit of trees; at
new year's day, when all human beings pass before Him like
lambs, as is said, <q>He fashioneth their hearts alike; He considereth
all their works</q>;<note place='foot'>Ps. xxxiii. 15.</note>
and at the feast of tabernacles,
judgment is given for the rains.
</p>

<p>
3. Messengers went forth (from Jerusalem) in six months:
in Nisan for the passover; in Ab<note place='foot'>Part of July
and August.</note> for the fast; in Elul for the
new year; in Tishri for the regulation of the feasts; in Kislev<note place='foot'>Part
of November and December.</note> for the dedication; in Adar<note place='foot'>Part of
February and March.</note> for the feast of lots; and also in
Iyar<note place='foot'>Part of April and May.</note> during the
existence of the Temple for the little passover.
</p>

<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>

<p>
4. For two months<note place='foot'>That is, for the new
moon observances.</note> they may profane the Sabbath, for
Nisan and for Tishri, because in them the messengers went
forth to Syria, and in them they regulated the feasts. And
during the existence of the Temple they might profane it in
all the months for the regulation of the offerings.
</p>

<p>
5. If the moon<note place='foot'>The Talmud states that when the
sun and moon were first created they were of equal size. The moon became
jealous of the sun, and she was reduced in bulk. The moon then appealed to
God, and she was consoled by the promise that Jacob, Samuel, and David were
to be likewise small. As, however, some injustice seemed to have been
committed, God ordained <q>a sin-offering</q> on every new moon, because the
moon had become less than the sun!</note> appeared high and clear, or did not appear
high and clear, the witnesses may profane the Sabbath on
account of it. R. José says, <q>if it appeared high and clear,
they may not profane the Sabbath on account of it.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. It happened that more than forty pairs of witnesses were
passing through, when R. Akivah detained them in Lydda.
Rabban Gamaliel sent to him, <q>if thou thus detainest the people,
it will be a stumbling-block in the future.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. When father and son have seen the new moon, they must
go (before the Sanhedrin), not that they may be combined
together, but in order that, should the evidence of either of
them be disallowed, the other may be combined with another
witness. R. Simeon says, <q>father, and son, and relatives in
every degree, may be allowed as competent witnesses for the
new moon.</q> R. José says, <q>it happened that Tobias, the physician,
his son, and his freed slave, saw the new moon in Jerusalem,
and the priests accepted his evidence, and that of his
son, but disallowed his slave; but when they came before the
Sanhedrin, they accepted him and his slave, but disallowed his
son.</q>
</p>

<p>
8. These witnesses are disallowed&mdash;gamblers with dice,
usurers,<note place='foot'>The Sanhedrin treated gamblers and
usurers as thieves.</note> pigeon-breeders,<note place='foot'>Those
who bred pigeons, to bet on their quickness of flight, or to entice
their neighbors' pigeons to their dovecotes.</note> traders
in produce of the Sabbatical
year, and slaves. This is the rule: all evidence that cannot
be received from a woman cannot be received from any of
these.
</p>

<p>
9. <q>He who has seen the new moon but cannot walk?</q>
<q>They must bring him on an ass or even in a bed.</q> Those
afraid of being waylaid may take sticks in their hands, and
if they have a long way to go, they may take provisions. If
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
they must be a day and a night on the road, they may profane
the Sabbath in travelling to testify for the new moon; as is
said, <q>These are the feasts of the LORD, which ye shall proclaim
in their seasons.</q><note place='foot'>Lev. xxiii. 4.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II</head>

<p>
1. If a witness were unknown, another was sent to testify
to him. At first they received evidence of the new moon from
anyone; but when the heretics<note place='foot'>Literally, Bithosin, the followers of
Biothos, who, with Zadok, the founder of the Sadducees, was a scholar of
Antigonus of Socho.</note> bribed (the witnesses), they
ordained that evidence should only be received from those
who were known.
</p>

<p>
2. At first high flames were lighted, but when the Samaritans
mimicked them, it was ordained that messengers should
be sent forth.
</p>

<p>
3. <q>How were these high flames lighted?</q> <q>They
brought long staves of cedarwood, canes, and branches of the
olive tree, and the tow of flax, which was tied with twine. And
one went to the top of the mountain and lighted them, and
waved the flame to and fro, up and down, till he could perceive
his companion doing so on the second mountain, and so
on the third mountain,</q> etc.
</p>

<p>
4. <q>And where were these high flames lighted?</q> <q>From
the Mount of Olives to Sartaba; from Sartaba to Grophinah;
from Grophinah to Hoveran; from Hoveran to Bethbaltin;
there they did not cease to wave them to and fro, up and
down, till the whole country of the captivity<note place='foot'>Babylon.</note>
looked like torches of fire.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. There was a large court in Jerusalem called Beth
Yangzek,<note place='foot'>So called in the Mishna. It means
<q>the place fenced in.</q> The Gemara reads, Beth Yazak, <q>the place of
chains.</q></note> there all the witnesses met, and there the Sanhedrin
examined them. And they made great feasts for them,
that they might come often. At first they did not stir from
thence all day.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, the Sabbath,
when they could only go four cubits.</note> Rabban Gamaliel the elder ordained, that
they might go 2,000 cubits on every side. And not only they,
but the midwife going to a birth; and they who go to rescue
from fire, or from enemies, or from inundation, or from fallen
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
buildings. These are as inhabitants of the place, and they
have 2,000 cubits on every side.
</p>

<p>
6. <q>How did they examine the witnesses?</q> <q>The first
pair which came were examined first, and they brought in the
eldest of them, and they said to him, <q>Tell us how you saw
the moon&mdash;(her horns) toward the sun, or away from the sun?
To the north, or to the south? What was her altitude?
Toward where her declination? And what was her breath?</q>
If he said <q>toward the sun,</q> he said nothing. Afterward they
brought in the second and examined; if the evidence was
found to agree, the evidence stood. The remaining pairs of
witnesses were then superficially examined, not because there
was necessity for their evidence, but not to discourage them,
that they might be willing to come again.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. The chief of the Sanhedrin said, <q>(the feast) is sanctified</q>;
and all the people answered after him, <q>Sanctified,
sanctified.</q> Whether the new moon had been seen in its season,
or not, they sanctified it. R. Eleazar, son of Zadok, said,
<q>if it were not seen in its season, they did not sanctify it, for
heaven had already sanctified it.</q>
</p>

<p>
8. Rabban Gamaliel had on a tablet and on the wall of his
chamber figures and phases of the moon which he showed
to ignorant witnesses, and said, <q>was it like this you saw her,
or like that?</q> It happened once that two witnesses came,
and said, <q>we saw the moon in the morning in the east, and
in the evening in the west</q>; said R. Jochanan, son of Nourri,
<q>they are false witnesses,</q> but when they came to Jamnia,
Rabban Gamaliel received their evidence. Two other witnesses
came, and said, <q>we saw the moon in her season, but
on the next evening of the intercalary day she was invisible,</q>
and R. Gamaliel received them. Said R. Dosah, son of Arkenaz,
<q>they are false witnesses, for how can they testify of a
woman being delivered, and on the morrow she is still pregnant?</q>
To him said R. Joshua, <q>I approve thy words.</q>
</p>

<p>
9. Rabban Gamaliel sent to (R. Joshua), <q>I order thee to
come to me with thy staff and money on the day of atonement,
according to thy reckoning.</q><note place='foot'>To carry money on the day of atonement
was unlawful, but according to R. Joshua's reckoning it would have been
a day too late.</note> R. Akivah went to (R.
Joshua), and found him sorrowing. He said to him, <q>I can
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
prove that all Rabban Gamaliel has done is well done, for it
is said, <q>These are the feasts of the Lord, even holy convocations,
which ye shall proclaim in their seasons,</q><note place='foot'>Lev.
xxiii. 4.</note> or out of
their seasons; I have no other feasts but these.</q> R. Joshua
came to R. Dose, son of Arkenaz. He said to him, <q>if we
are to judge the tribunal of Rabban Gamaliel, we must also
judge the tribunals which have existed from the days of Moses
till now,</q> for it is said, <q>Then went up Moses and Aaron,
Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel.</q><note place='foot'>Exod.
xxiv. 9.</note> <q>And
why were not the names of the elders mentioned, but to inform
us that every three men in Israel who compose a
tribunal, are as a tribunal of Moses?</q> R. Joshua took his
staff and money in his hand, and went to Jamnia to Rabban
Gamaliel on the day when the atonement began, according to
his reckoning. Rabban Gamaliel stood up and kissed him on
his head, saying to him, <q>come in peace, my master and disciple&mdash;my
master in wisdom, my disciple in obeying my
words.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III</head>

<p>
1. <q>The Sanhedrin and all Israel saw (the new moon); the
witnesses were examined, but it became dark before they
could say, <q>Sanctified</q>?</q> <q>The month is intercalary.</q> <q>The
Sanhedrin alone saw it?</q> <q>Two members must stand up and
testify before them, and they shall say, <q>Sanctified, sanctified.</q></q>
<q>Three composing a Sanhedrin saw it?</q> <q>Two of
them must stand up, and their assessors must be seated with
the single member, and before them they shall testify, and say,
<q>Sanctified, sanctified,</q> because an individual cannot be trusted
by himself alone.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. All cornets are allowed, except (horns) of a heifer,<note place='foot'>Not to
remind God of the sin of the golden calf.</note> because
it is (written) horn.<note place='foot'>Deut. xxxiii.
17.</note> Said Rabbi José, <q>are not all cornets
called horn? for it is said, <q>When they shall make a long
(blast) with the ram's horn.</q></q><note place='foot'>Josh. vi. 5.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. The cornet of the New Year was a straight horn of a
wild goat; and its mouthpiece was plated with gold. And the
two trumpets<note place='foot'>Num. x.</note> were stationed on each side. The cornet
prolonged
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
its note when the trumpets ceased, because the obligation
of the day was for the cornet.
</p>

<p>
4. On fast days (there were) crooked rams' horns; and their
mouthpieces were plated with silver. And the two trumpets
were stationed in the midst. The cornet ceased, and the trumpets
prolonged their notes, because the obligation of the day
was for the trumpets.
</p>

<p>
5. The jubilee is like the New Year for the sounding and
the blessings. R. Judah says, <q>on the New Year they
sounded rams' horns; and on the jubilee wild goats' horns.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. A cornet, which was rent and cemented, is disallowed.
One cemented from fragments of cornets is disallowed. <q>It
had a hole, which was closed?</q> <q>If it hinder the sound, it is
disallowed; but if not, it is allowed.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. <q>If one sound the cornet within a pit, a cistern, or in
an earthenware vessel, and one (outside) hears the sound of
the cornet?</q> <q>He is free.</q><note place='foot'>From
the obligation of hearing or sounding.</note> <q>But if he hear the echo of the
sound?</q> <q>He is not free.</q> And so, if one be passing behind
a synagogue, or his house adjoin the synagogue, and he hear
the sound of the cornet, or the reading of the roll of Esther,
he is legally free, provided he heard it with due attention; but
if not, he is not legally free. Although one hears as well as
another, yet one hears with hearty intention, and another
without hearty intention.
</p>

<p>
8. <q>And it came to pass, when Moses held up his hand
that Israel prevailed,</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xvii.
11.</note> etc. And how could the hands of
Moses make the battle, or crush the battle? But it is written
to tell thee that while Israel looked to Heaven for aid,
and subjected their hearts to their heavenly Father, they prevailed;
and when they did not do so, they were defeated. Like
as He says, <q>Make thee a fiery serpent, and set it upon a
pole, and it shall come to pass that everyone that is bitten,
when he looketh upon it, shall live.</q><note place='foot'>Num.
xxi. 8.</note> And how could the
serpent kill, or make alive? But when the Israelites looked
to Heaven for aid, and subjected their hearts to their heavenly
Father, they were healed; and when they did not do so, they
perished. One deaf and dumb, or an idiot, or a child, cannot,
as proxies, free others from their obligations. This is the
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
rule: all who are not responsible for a thing, cannot free
others from their obligations.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV</head>

<p>
1. When the feast of New Year happened on the Sabbath,
they used to sound the cornet in the Sanctuary; but not in
the provinces. After the destruction of the Sanctuary, R.
Jochanan, son of Zacai, decreed that they should sound it in
every place in which there is a tribunal of justice. R. Eleazar
says, <q>R. Jochanan, son of Zacai, decreed it only for Jamnia.</q>
But the Sages said to him, <q>it was all one for Jamnia, and all
one for every place in which there is a tribunal of justice.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. And again,<note place='foot'>There is a supposed hiatus in the
Mishna text to the following effect: <q>In Jerusalem they sounded through the
whole city during the session of the Sanhedrin (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, till
noon); but in Jamnia they did not sound in the city, but
only before the tribunal of justice. And again,</q> etc.</note>
Jerusalem was privileged above Jamnia, because
every city which could be seen, and the sounding heard,
and which was near, and to which it was allowed to go, might
sound the cornet; but in Jamnia they could only sound it before
the tribunal of justice.
</p>

<p>
3. At first the palm-branch was taken seven days in the
Sanctuary, and one day in the provinces. After the destruction
of the Temple, R. Jochanan, son of Zacai, decreed, <q>that
the palm-branch should be taken in the provinces for seven
days, to commemorate the Sanctuary</q>; also <q>that the whole
day of the waving<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>,
of the sheaf of the first-fruits. Lev. xxiii. 10.</note>
it should be forbidden (to eat new corn).</q>
</p>

<p>
4. At first they received evidence of the new moon during
the whole (thirtieth) day; but once the witnesses delayed
coming, and the Levites erred in the chant. They decreed,
that they should receive evidence only till the time of the
evening sacrifice; and if witnesses came after the evening sacrifice,
that and the next day were kept holy. After the destruction
of the Sanctuary Rabban Jochanan, son of Zacai, decreed,
<q>that they should receive evidence of the new moon
during the whole day.</q> R. Joshua, son of Korcha, says, <q>and
again Rabban Jochanan, son of Zacai, decreed that wherever
the chief of the Sanhedrin might be, the witnesses need only
go to the place of its meeting.</q>
</p>

<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>

<p>
5. The order of blessings to be said on the New Year is,
<q>The Fathers,</q><note place='foot'>The titles or the headings of the
blessings which were used in the services of the Temple and of the synagogues
out of Jerusalem.</note> and <q>The Mighty,</q> and <q>Sanctification of
the Name,</q> and there are comprehended the <q>Kingdoms</q>
without blowing the trumpet; <q>The Holiness of the Day,</q>
and he blows; <q>The Remembrances,</q> and he blows; <q>The
Trumpets,</q> and he blows. And he says, <q>The Service,</q>
<q>The Confession,</q> and <q>Blessing of the Priests.</q> The
words of R. Jochanan, son of Nourri. Said R. Akivah to him,
<q>if the trumpet be not blown after <q>The Kingdoms,</q> why are
they mentioned?</q> But the order is, <q>The Fathers,</q> and
<q>The Mighty,</q> and <q>Sanctification of the Name,</q> and there
are comprehended <q>The Kingdoms,</q> with sanctification of
the Day, and he blows; <q>The Remembrances,</q> and he
blows; <q>The Trumpets,</q> and he blows. And he says, <q>The
Service,</q> <q>The Confession,</q> and <q>Blessing of the Priests.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. They cannot read less than ten (texts of Scripture) relating
to <q>The Kingdom,</q> ten relating to <q>Remembrances,</q>
and ten to <q>Trumpets.</q><note place='foot'>Three were read from the Law, three
from the Psalms, and three from the Prophets&mdash;such passages as Exod. xv.
18, Ps. xxiv., Ezek. xx. 33, Zech. xiv. 9, etc.</note> R. Jochanan, son of Nourri, says,
<q>if three be read from all of them, the duty is fulfilled, but they
mention not the remembrance of the kingdom, and trumpet
of vengeance.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, they would not read such
passages as Ps. lxxviii. 39.</note> They must begin with the Law and end with
the Prophets.</q> R. José says, <q>if they end with the Law, the
duty is fulfilled.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. (The minister of the congregation) must go over to the
reading-desk on the feast of the New Year. The second minister
must blow the trumpet. But at the hour for the hymn
the first must read the hymn.
</p>

<p>
8. For sounding the trumpet of the New Year they may
not transgress the Sabbatical limit, they may not remove for
it a heap of stones, they may not climb a tree, and they may
not ride a beast, or swim over water. Nor may they cut
it<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, to improve its tone.</note>
with anything that violates the Sabbatical rest, or violates a
negative command. But if one wish he may pour into it water
or wine.<note place='foot'>To clear its tone.</note> They
may not prevent children from blowing, but
they may practise in teaching them. But he who practises
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
blowing is not freed from his obligation, and he who listens to
the practice is not freed from his obligation.
</p>

<p>
9. The order of blowing the trumpet is, three blasts blown
thrice. The measure of the blast is as six alarms. The measure
of the alarm is as three shrieks. If one blew the first and
prolonged the blast for the second to be as two, it reckons but
as one. He who has said the blessings, and afterward a trumpet
is given to him, must blow a blast, an alarm, and a blast
three times. As the minister of the congregation is bound, so
is each individual bound. R. Gamaliel says, <q>the minister of
the congregation releases the public from their obligations.</q>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>On Fasting</head>

<quote rend='display'>
When Rain is to be Prayed for&mdash;Proclamations for Fasting&mdash;Ceremonial
of Fasting&mdash;Prayers&mdash;Blowing of Trumpets&mdash;R. Gamaliel and R.
Meier&mdash;Sign of Famine&mdash;Partial Rain&mdash;Pestilence&mdash;Story of Hone
Hammeagal&mdash;Lifting Up of Hands&mdash;Deputies&mdash;Bringing Wood&mdash;Five
Things Happened in Tammuz and Five in Ab&mdash;Mortifications&mdash;Rejoicings.
</quote>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I</head>

<p>
1. <q>When do we remember in prayer the heavy rain?</q>
Rabbi Eleazar said, <q>from the first holiday of the feast (of
tabernacles),</q> Rabbi Joshua said, <q>from the last holiday of
the feast.</q> To him said Rabbi Joshua, <q>when the rain is no
mark of blessing in the feast, why should one remember it?</q>
Said Rabbi Eleazar to him, <q>even I did not say to ask for it,
but to remember the blowing of the wind, and the descent
of the rain in its season.</q> He replied to him, <q>if so, one can
remember it always.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. We ask for rain only near to the season of rains. Rabbi
Judah said,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, the Chazan that prays
Musaph.</note> <q>he who passes last before the ark on the last
holiday of the feast of tabernacles remembers it; the first does
not remember it. On the first holiday of the passover the
first remembers it, the last does not remember it.</q> How long
do we ask for rain? Rabbi Judah said, <q>till the passover be
ended.</q> Rabbi Meier said, <q>till Nisan depart,<note place='foot'>Nisan
corresponded partly to March and April.</note> as is said,<note place='foot'>Joel
ii. 23.</note> <q>And He will cause to come down for you the rain, the former
rain, and the latter rain in the first month.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
3. On the third day of Marchesvan<note place='foot'>Marchesvan corresponded partly to
October and November.</note> we ask for the rain.
Rabban Gamaliel said, <q>on the seventh, fifteen days after the
feast, that the last Israelite returning home from the feast may
reach the river Euphrates.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. <q>If the seventeenth day of Marchesvan arrive, and the
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>
rain does not come down?</q> <q>Men of eminence begin to fast
for three days. They may eat and drink by night. And they
may work, and wash, and anoint themselves, and put on their
sandals, and use their couches.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. <q>If the first day of the month Chislev<note place='foot'>Part of
November and part of December.</note> arrive, and the
rain does not come down?</q> <q>The tribunal proclaims three
fast-days<note place='foot'>The fast-days of strict Pharisees
were Mondays and Thursdays, because on a Thursday Moses went up to Mount
Sinai, and returned on a Monday with the second Tables of the Law.</note>
for the congregation. Persons may, however, eat
and drink by night. And they may work, and wash, and
anoint themselves, and put on their sandals, and use their
couches.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. <q>If these days pass over, and there be no answer?</q>
<q>The tribunal proclaims three other fast-days for the congregation.
Persons may, however, eat and drink while it is still
day. But they are forbidden work, and washing, and anointing,
and putting on sandals, and the use of the couch. And
the baths are locked up.</q> <q>If these days pass over, and there
be no answer?</q> <q>The tribunal proclaims for them seven
more; these are altogether thirteen fast-days for the congregation.</q>
<q>And what are these fast-days more than the first
six?</q> <q>Because during them men blow with the trumpets
and lock up their shops.</q> On Monday they can half open
them at dark. But on Thursday they may open them for honor
to the approaching Sabbath.
</p>

<p>
7. <q>If these days pass over, and there be no answer?</q>
<q>People diminish business, building, planting, betrothals and
marriages, and salutations of peace between man and his
friend, as children of men ashamed before OMNIPRESENCE.</q>
The men of eminence have again recourse to fasting,
till Nisan be ended. If Nisan be ended, and the rain comes
down, it is a mark of cursing, as is said,<note place='foot'>1 Sam. xii.
17.</note> <q>Is it not wheat harvest
to-day?</q> etc.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II</head>

<p>
1. <q>What is the order of the fast-days?</q> <q>Men draw out
the ark containing the rolls of the Law to the public street
of the city, and they put burnt ashes on the top of the ark,
and on the head of the prince, and on the head of the president
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
of the tribunal, and everyone takes and puts ashes on his own
head.</q> The most aged of them says before them touching
words, <q>Brethren, it is not said for the men of Nineveh,
<q>And God saw their sackcloth and their fasting,</q><note place='foot'>Jonah
iii. 10.</note> but <q>God saw their works, that they
returned from their evil way.</q> And in the tradition
(of the prophet) he says,<note place='foot'>Joel ii. 13.</note> <q>Rend your hearts
and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord your God.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
2. When they stood in prayer, they placed before the ark
an aged man and full of experience, one who had children
and an unblemished house, that his heart be not distracted in
prayer, and he says before them twenty-four blessings, the
usual eighteen for every day, and he adds to them six more.
</p>

<p>
3. These are they, <q>remembrances,</q><note place='foot'>Prayers for the New
Year.</note> and <q>blowing of the trumpets,</q><note place='foot'>Prayers for the New
Year.</note> <q>In my distress I cried unto the Lord, and He
heard me,</q><note place='foot'>Ps. cxx. 1.</note> <q>I will lift up my eyes
unto the hills,</q><note place='foot'>Ps. cxxi. 1.</note> <q>out of
the depths have I cried unto Thee, O Lord,</q><note place='foot'>Ps. cxxx.</note>
<q>A prayer of the afflicted when he is overwhelmed.</q><note place='foot'>Ps.
cii.</note> Rabbi Judah says, <q>it was not necessary to say the <q>remembrances,</q>
and <q>the trumpets,</q> but he said instead of them, <q>If there be in the land
famine, if there be pestilence,</q></q><note place='foot'>1 Kings viii. 37.</note>
etc. <q>The word of the Lord that came to Jeremiah concerning the
dearth.</q><note place='foot'>Jer. xiv. 1.</note> And he said
their closing benediction.
</p>

<p>
4. For the first additional prayer he said, <q>He who answered
Abraham our father on Mount Moriah, He shall
answer you, and hear the voice of your cry this day. Blessed
be Thou, Lord, the Redeemer of Israel.</q> For the second he
said, <q>He who answered our fathers by the Red Sea, He will
answer you, and hear the voice of your cry this day. Blessed
be Thou, Lord, who rememberest those forgotten by man.</q>
For the third he said, <q>He who answered Joshua in Gilgal,
He will answer you, and hear the voice of your cry this day.
Blessed be Thou, Lord, who hearest the blowing of the trumpet.</q>
For the fourth he said, <q>He who answered Samuel in
Mizpah, He will answer you, and hear the voice of your cry
this day. Blessed be Thou, Lord, who hearest the cry of distress.</q>
For the fifth he said, <q>He who answered Elijah on
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
Mount Carmel, He will answer you, and hear the voice of
your cry this day. Blessed be Thou, Lord, who hearest
prayer.</q> For the sixth he said, <q>He who answered Jonah
from the fish's belly, He will answer you, and hear the voice
of your cry this day. Blessed be Thou, Lord, who art ever
answering prayer in the time of need.</q> For the seventh he
said, <q>He who answered David and Solomon his son in Jerusalem,
He will answer you, and will hear the voice of your cry
this day. Blessed be Thou, Lord, who hast pity on the earth.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. It happened in the days of Rabbi Chelpatha and R.
Chanania, son of Teradion, that a minister passed before the
ark, and finished the whole blessing, and the congregation did
not answer after him, Amen. One cried out, <q>Let the priests
blow the trumpets</q>; they blew. (The minister prayed,) <q>May
He who answered Abraham our Father on Mount Moriah answer
you, and hear the voice of your cry this day.</q> (One
cried out,) <q>Let the sons of Aaron blow an alarm</q>; they blew
an alarm. (The minister prayed,) <q>May He who answered
our fathers by the Red Sea, answer you, and hear the voice of
your cry this day.</q> And when the matter came before the
Sages they said it was not customary to do so, save in the
Eastern gate and on the Mountain of the House.
</p>

<p>
6. These are the first three fasts. The priests of the weekly
Watch of the Temple fasted, but not completely. And the
priests of their <q>Father's House</q><note place='foot'>Some understand the priests
ministering in their course, others explain this expression by Deut. xviii. 8. The
priests were divided into twenty-four Watches. Each Watch ministered for a
week in the Temple. These Watches were again subdivided into seven
<q>Father's Houses,</q> and each <q>Father's House</q> officiated for a day in the
Temple. A dispensation from fasting was granted to the priests on duty, that
they might not be weak in the service of the Sanctuary.</note> did not fast at all. In
the second three fasts the men of the Watch fasted completely.
And the men of their <q>Father's House</q> fasted, but not completely.
<q>In the seven last fasts both of them fasted completely.</q>
The words of Rabbi Joshua. But the Sages say, <q>in
the three first fasts neither one nor other fasted at all. In
the second three fasts the priests of the Watch fasted, but not
completely. And the priests of their <q>Father's House</q> did
not fast at all. In the seven last fasts the priests of the Watch
fasted completely, and the priests of their <q>Father's House</q>
fasted, but not completely.</q>
</p>

<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>

<p>
7. The men of the Watch are allowed to drink wine by
night, but not by day, and the men who inherit the patrimony
of their fathers<note place='foot'>This means the officiating
priests.</note> may not drink it neither by day nor night.
The men of the Watch and the Delegates<note place='foot'>The delegates
were the representatives of the congregation, who attended
at the public sacrifices, and prayed on their behalf.</note> are not allowed
to shave, nor wash, except on Thursdays for the honor of the
approaching Sabbath.
</p>

<p>
8. That which is written in <q>The Roll of Fasting,</q><note place='foot'>This
was a book written in Chaldee, as is proved by the quotations from it.</note> <q>not
to mourn</q> on certain days&mdash;the day before them it is not allowed&mdash;the
day after them it is allowed to mourn. Rabbi
José said, <q>both before and after the day it is not allowed.</q>
But when it is written, <q>not to fast,</q> both the day before and
the day after the fast, it is allowed to fast. Rabbi José said,
<q>before the fast it is not allowed&mdash;after the fast it is allowed.</q>
</p>

<p>
9. The rulers must not proclaim fasts for the congregation
to begin on Thursday, so as not to raise the market. But the
three first fasts are Monday, Thursday, and Monday. And the
three second, Thursday, Monday, and Thursday. Rabbi José
said, <q>as the first fasts are not to begin on Thursday, so likewise
the second and the last are not to begin on that day.</q>
</p>

<p>
10. <q>The rulers must not proclaim fasting for the congregation
on the feast of New Moon, and on the feasts of Dedication,
and Purim; but if they have already begun, they need
not cease.</q> The words of Rabbi Gamaliel. Said R. Meier,
<q>even though Rabbi Gamaliel said they need not cease, he
admits that the congregation do not fast the whole day; and
so also on the ninth of Ab, the fast for the burning of the Temple,
if it happen on the eve of the Sabbath.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III</head>

<p>
1. The order of these fasts is said only for the first rains.
But if the sprouts wither, men blow an alarm off-hand. And
if the rains cease between rain and rain forty days, men blow
an alarm off-hand. Because it is a sign of famine.
</p>

<p>
2. If the rains came down for the sprouts, but did not come
down for the trees, for the trees, but not for the sprouts, for
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
both these, but not for the wells, pits, and caves, men must
blow an alarm for them off-hand.
</p>

<p>
3. And so also for the city, on which the rain did not come
down, as is written,<note place='foot'>Amos iv. 7.</note>
<q>And I caused it to rain upon one city,
and caused it not to rain upon another city; one piece was
rained upon, and the piece whereupon it rained not withered.</q>
</p>

<p>
This city fasts and blows an alarm, and all its neighboring
cities fast, but do not blow alarms. R. Akiba said, <q>they blow
alarms, but do not fast.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. And so for a city, in which there is pestilence, or falling
of buildings, that city fasts and blows an alarm, and all the
neighboring cities fast, but do not blow an alarm. Rabbi
Akiba said, <q>they blow alarms, but do not fast.</q> <q>What is
pestilence?</q> <q>A city containing 500 men, and there go forth
from it three dead in three days, one after the other; this is
pestilence, less than this is not pestilence.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. For these things men blow an alarm in every place&mdash;for
the blasting and for the blighting, for the locust and for the
caterpillar, and for the evil beast, and for the sword, they
blow an alarm over them, because it is a spreading wound.
</p>

<p>
6. It happened that the elders went down from Jerusalem
to their cities, and proclaimed fasting, because the blasting
appeared, as much as would fill an oven, in Askelon. And
again they proclaimed a fast, because the wolves devoured
two children beyond Jordan: Rabbi José said, <q>not because
they devoured them, but because the wolves were seen.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. For these things men blow an alarm on the Sabbath&mdash;for
a city, encompassed by Gentiles, or by a flood, and for a
ship tossed in the sea. Rabbi José said, <q>for help, but not
for a cry of distress.</q> Simon the Temanite said, <q>also for
pestilence,</q> but the Sages did not admit it.
</p>

<p>
8. For all distress&mdash;may it not come on the congregation&mdash;men
sound an alarm, except for too much rain. It happened
that they said to Honé Hammeagal, <q>pray that the
rain come down</q>: he said to them, <q>go and bring in the
passover ovens, that they be not dissolved.</q> He prayed,
but the rain did not come down&mdash;What did he do? He dug
a hole and stood in it, and said before HIM, <q>Our Lord of
the world, thy sons have turned toward me, because I am a
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
son of the House in Thy Presence. I am sworn in Thy great
Name, that I move not from hence, till Thou have pity on
Thy children.</q> The rain began to drop; he said, <q>I did not
ask it thus, but rains for wells, pits, and caves.</q> The rain
began to descend with storm. He said, <q>I did not ask it
thus, but reasonable rain, with blessing and free-will.</q> The
showers came down as they ought, until all Israel went up
from Jerusalem to the Mount of Olives on account of the
rains. They came and said to him, <q>as thou hast prayed that
the rains should come down, so pray that they may depart.</q>
He said to them, <q>go and see if the Stone of Proclamation<note place='foot'>A stone
on which lost property was deposited, and publication of it was
made, so that its owner might reclaim it.</note>
be covered.</q> Simon the son of Shatach sent to him word,
<q>if thou wert not Honé, I would excommunicate thee; but
what shall I do to thee, since thou prayest before OMNIPRESENCE,
and He does thy will, as a son who plays upon his
father, and he does his will? and for thee the Scripture says,
<q>Thy father and thy mother shall be glad, and she that bare
thee shall rejoice.</q></q><note place='foot'>Prov. xxiii. 25.</note>
</p>

<p>
9. <q>If men were fasting and the rains came down for them
before the sun rose?</q> <q>They need not complete the day.</q>
<q>If the rains came down after sunrise?</q> <q>They must complete
it.</q> R. Eliezer said, <q>before noon they need not
complete it, if after noon they must complete it.</q> It happened,
that the rulers proclaimed a fast in Lydda, and the
rains came down in the forenoon. Said R. Tarphon, <q>go and
eat, and drink, and make holiday.</q> They went and ate and
drank, and made holiday, and they came in the evening and
read the great Thanksgiving.<note place='foot'>Ps. cxxxvi.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV</head>

<p>
1. Three times in the year the priests elevate their hands
to bless the people, four times a day&mdash;in the morning prayer,
in the following prayer, in the evening prayer, and at the
locking of the gates. These times are the fast days, on the
fasts of the deputies, and on the day of atonement.
</p>

<p>
2. These are the Delegates, according as is said, <q>Command
the children of Israel, and say unto them, My offering and
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
my bread for my sacrifices made by fire.</q><note place='foot'>Num.
xxviii. 2.</note> And how is it
possible, that the offering of a man should be sacrificed, and
he does not stand by it? Therefore, the former prophets decreed
four-and-twenty Watches. For every Watch there were
Delegates in Jerusalem of priests, Levites, and Israelites.
When the time approached (for them) to go up, the priests
and Levites went up to Jerusalem, and the Israelites, who
belonged to the Watch, gathered in their cities and read in
the history of Genesis.
</p>

<p>
3. And the Delegates used to fast four days in the week,
from the second day till the fifth. But they did not fast on
the eve of the Sabbath, for honor to the Sabbath. Nor on
the first day, that they should not go forth from repose and
enjoyment, to toil, and fasting, and death. On the first day
they read in Genesis,<note place='foot'>Gen. i. 6,
etc.</note> <q>and let there be a firmament.</q> On
the second, <q>let there be a firmament and let the waters be
gathered together.</q> On the third day, <q>let the waters be
gathered together, and let there be lights.</q> On the fourth,
<q>let there be lights, and let the waters bring forth abundantly.</q>
On the fifth, <q>let the waters bring forth abundantly,</q>
and <q>let the earth bring forth.</q> On the sixth, <q>let the earth
bring forth,</q> and <q>the heavens were finished.</q> Two men read
a large portion, but a small portion was read by one. At
morning prayer, at the following prayer, at the evening prayer,
they went in and read orally (by heart), as they read the
<q>Hear,</q><note place='foot'>Deut. vi. 4, etc.</note>
etc. On the eve of the Sabbath they did not go
in to evening prayer for honor to the Sabbath.
</p>

<p>
4. Every day when there is praise, the Delegates are not
at morning prayer. When there is the additional offering at
the following prayer, there is not the closing prayer at the
locking up of the gates. <q>When there is the offering of the
wood, there is not the evening prayer.</q> The words of Rabbi
Akiba. The son of Azai said to him, R. Joshua thus taught
it: <q>when there was an additional offering, the Delegates did
not come to evening prayer; when there was the offering of
the wood, they did not come to prayer at the locking up of
the gates.</q> R. Akiba changed his opinion, and taught as the
son of Azai.
</p>

<p>
5. The times of bringing wood for the altar by priests and
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>
people were nine. On the first of Nisan,<note place='foot'>Part
of March and April.</note> the children of
Arach, son of Judah, brought it. On the twentieth of Tammuz,<note place='foot'>Part
of June and July.</note> the children of David, the son of Judah, brought it.
On the fifth of Ab,<note place='foot'>Part of July and August.</note>
the children of Parhush, the son of Judah,
brought it. On the seventh, the children of Jonadab, the son
of Rechab, brought it. On the tenth, the children of Sinah, the
son of Benjamin, brought it. On the fifteenth, the children of
Zathva, the son of Judah, brought it, and with them the priests
and Levites and all who were ignorant of their tribe. And
the children of Gonebi Eli<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>,
<q>thieves of the pestle and dried figs</q>; because when forbidden by
Jeroboam to go up to the Temple with the first-fruits and wood, they deceived
the watchers by saying they were only going to press figs.&mdash;Jer. Tal.</note>
and the children of Kozhi Kezihoth.
On the twentieth, the children of Pachath Moab, the
son of Judah, brought it. On the twentieth of Elul,<note place='foot'>Part
of August and September.</note> the children
of Adin, the son of Judah, brought it. On the first of
Tebeth, the children of Parush returned the second time. On
the first of Tebeth,<note place='foot'>Part of December and
January.</note> there was no meeting of the Delegates,
as there was on it <q>The Praise,</q> and the additional offering
at the following prayer, and the offering of the wood.
</p>

<p>
6. Five things happened to our fathers on the seventeenth
of Tammuz, and five on the ninth of Ab. On the seventeenth
of Tammuz the stone tables were broken, and the daily offering
ceased, and the city was broken up, and Apostemus<note place='foot'>Antiochus
Epiphanes.</note> burnt the law, and he set up an image in the Temple. On
the ninth of Ab it was proclaimed to our fathers, that they
should not enter the land, and the House was ruined for the
first and second time, and Bither was taken, and the city was
ploughed up. On entering Ab we must diminish joy.
</p>

<p>
7. The week in which the ninth of Ab comes, men are not
allowed to clip their hair, or wash their clothes; but on Thursday
they are allowed, for honor to the Sabbath. On the eve
of the ninth of Ab one must not eat from two dishes, must not
eat flesh, and must not drink wine. Rabban Simon, the son
of Gamaliel, said, <q>one must change the style of living.</q> R.
Judah <q>enjoined to turn over the beds,</q> but the Sages did
not approve him.
</p>

<p>
8. Said Rabban Simon, the son of Gamaliel, <q>there were no
holidays in Israel like the fifteenth of Ab, or like the day of
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>
atonement. Because in them the daughters of Jerusalem
promenaded in white garments borrowed, that no one might
be ashamed of her poverty. All these garments must be baptized.
And the daughters of Jerusalem promenaded and
danced in the vineyards. And what did they say? <q>Look
here, young man, and see whom you choose; look not for
beauty, look for family;</q> <q>Favor is deceitful, and beauty is
vain, but a woman that feareth the Lord, she shall be praised;</q>
and it is said, <q>Give her of the fruit of her hands, and let her
own works praise her in the gates,</q><note place='foot'>Prov. xxxi.
30, 31.</note> and also it is said, <q>Go
forth, O ye daughters of Zion, and behold King Solomon with
the crown, wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of
his espousals, and in the day of the gladness of his heart.</q><note place='foot'>Sol.
Song, iii. 11.</note> The day of his espousals, this is the gift of the Law; and in
the day of the gladness of his heart, this is the building of the
Sanctuary, and may it be speedily built in our days. Amen.</q>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Feast-Offering<note place='foot'>The feast-offering (<q>chagiga</q>) was
the offering of individual worshippers, and was quite distinct from the sacrifices
of the whole congregation. See <q>Treatise on the Passover,</q>
<ref target="talmud_passover_chap_vi_4">vi. 4</ref>, note.</note></head>

<quote rend='display'>
What is a Child?&mdash;Offerings&mdash;Crooked and Straight&mdash;Remission of
Vows&mdash;Persons Unsuitable for the World&mdash;Laying on of
Hands&mdash;Baptisms&mdash;Defilements&mdash;Purity&mdash;Vessels
of the Sanctuary.
</quote>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I</head>

<p>
1. All are bound to appear in the Temple, except the deaf,
an idiot, and a child, and a eunuch, and women, and slaves
who are not free, and the lame, and the blind, and the sick,
and the aged, and the man who cannot go afoot. <q>What
is a child?</q> <q>Everyone who cannot ride on the shoulder
of his father, and go up from Jerusalem to the Mountain of
the House.</q> The words of the school of Shammai. But the
school of Hillel say, <q>everyone who cannot grasp his father's
hand, and go up from Jerusalem to the Mountain of the
House,</q> as is said, <q>three times.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxiii. 14.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. The school of Shammai say, <q>the appearance in the
Temple is with two pieces of silver, and the peace-offering
with a meah of silver.</q><note place='foot'>Worth perhaps 3d.</note>
But the school of Hillel say, <q>the
appearance is with a meah of silver, and the feast-offering
with two pieces of silver.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. The burnt-offerings of the appointed feasts come from
ordinary money; but the peace-offering from tithes. <q>The
offerings on the first holiday of the passover?</q><note place='foot'>Jer.
Tal. says <q>Tabernacles.</q></note> The school
of Shammai say, <q>from ordinary money,</q> but the school of
Hillel say, <q>from tithes.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. Israelites discharge their duty with vows, with free-will
offerings, and with tithes of animals; and priests with sin-offerings,
with trespass-offerings, and with the breast and
shoulder, and first-born, but not with fowls, nor with meat-offerings.
</p>

<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>

<p>
5. <q>If one have a large family and small income?</q> <q>He
must bring more peace-offerings, and less burnt-offerings.</q>
<q>If a small family and large income?</q> <q>He must bring
more burnt-offerings, and less peace-offerings.</q> <q>If both be
small?</q> <q>Of this they say, a silver meah, and two pieces of
silver are sufficient.</q> <q>If both be large?</q> <q>Of this it is
said, every man shall give as he is able according to the blessing
of the Lord thy God which He hath given thee.</q><note place='foot'>Deut.
xvi. 17.</note>
</p>

<p>
6. When one did not bring his peace-offering on the first
holiday of the feast, he may bring it during the holidays, and
even on the last day of the feast. <q>If the feast passed over,
and he did not bring the peace-offering?</q> <q>He is not
obliged to bring it.</q> For this it is said, <q>that which is crooked
cannot be made straight, and that which is wanting cannot be
numbered.</q><note place='foot'>Eccl. i. 15.</note>
</p>

<p>
7. Rabbi Simon, the son of Menasia, said, <q>if thou shalt
say, a thief or a robber, he may return and become straight.</q>
R. Simon, the son of Jochai, said, <q>we do not call one crooked,
save one straight at first, and he became afterward crooked;
and this is the disciple of the wise, who departs from the Law.</q>
</p>

<p>
8. The remission of vows is like flying in the air, and it has
no foundation. The decisions for the Sabbath, peace-offerings,
and trespasses, are as mountains hanging on a hair; because
the verse is small, but the decisions are many. Jurisprudence,
and the Temple service, cleanness and uncleanness, and illegal
connections, have their own foundations; they, they are the
body of the law.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II</head>

<p>
1. Men may not discourse on illegal connections with three,<note place='foot'>From
motives of delicacy.</note> nor on the work of creation with two,<note place='foot'>This
must be done only by one (Deut. iv. 32).</note> nor on the cherubs
with one,<note place='foot'>Ezek. x.; Isa. vi.</note> save when
one is wise, and comprehends it of his
own knowledge. Everyone who considers four things, it
were suitable for him that he did not come into the world.
What is in the height? what is in the depth? what is before?
and what is behind? And everyone who is not anxious for
the honor of his Creator, it were suitable for him that he did
not come into the world.
</p>

<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>

<p>
2. José, the son of Joezar, said that <q>one is not to lay his
hand on the offering.</q> José, the son of Jochanan, said, <q>he
is to lay his hand on the offering.</q> Joshua, the son of Perachia,
said, that he <q>is not to lay on his hand.</q> Nittai, the
Arbelite, said, <q>he is to lay on his hand.</q> Judah, the son of
Tabai, said, that <q>he is not to lay on his hand.</q> Simon, the
son of Shatach, said, <q>he is to lay on his hand.</q> Shemaiah,
said, <q>he is to lay on his hand.</q> Abtalion said, <q>he is not to
lay on his hand.</q> Hillel and Menachem did not dispute.
Menachem went out and Shammai entered. Shammai said,
<q>he is not to lay on his hand.</q> Hillel said, <q>he is to lay on
his hand.</q><note place='foot'>This decision is for private sacrifices,
but for public sacrifices there seems (according to the Talmud) to
have been no <q>laying on of hands,</q> except in the case of the scapegoat and
the bullock, when the congregation had sinned through ignorance.</note>
The first were Princes, and the second were
Presidents of the Tribunal.
</p>

<p>
3. The school of Shammai said, <q>men may bring peace-offerings
during the feast, but they are not to lay their hands
on them, and they are not to bring burnt-offerings.</q> But the
house of Hillel say, <q>they may bring peace-offerings, and
burnt-offerings, and lay their hands on them.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. <q>When Pentecost happens to be on the eve of the Sabbath?</q>
The school of Shammai say, <q>the day of slaughtering
the offering is after the Sabbath.</q> But the school of
Hillel say, <q>there is no day of slaughtering after the Sabbath.</q>
</p>

<p>
But they both acknowledge that if it happened to be on
the Sabbath, the day of slaughter is after the Sabbath. And
the high priest must not robe in his vestments, though they
are allowed in seasons of mourning and fasting, for fear of
confirming the words of those who say that <q>Pentecost is after
the Sabbath.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>,
the Sadducees (Lev. xxiii. 15).</note>
</p>

<p>
5. Men must wash their hands for ordinary eating, but for
tithes and for the heave-offering they must be baptized. And
for the sin-offering, if the hands be unclean, the body is unclean.
</p>

<p>
6. He who baptized himself for ordinary eating, and indicated
it to be for ordinary eating, he is prohibited from (eating)
the tithe. <q>If he baptized for the tithe, and indicated it to
be for the tithe?</q> <q>He is prohibited from eating heave-offerings.</q>
<q>If he baptized for heave-offerings, and indicated
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>
it to be for heave-offerings?</q> <q>He is prohibited from eating
the holy flesh.</q> <q>If he baptized for the holy flesh, and indicated
it to be for the holy flesh?</q> <q>He is prohibited from
the sin-offering.</q> <q>If he baptized for the weighty?</q> <q>He
is permitted the light.</q> <q>If he baptized, and did not indicate
his intention?</q> <q>It is as no baptism.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. Treading on the garments of an ordinary man defiled the
Pharisees. Treading on the garments of the Pharisees defiled
those who eat the heave-offering. Treading on the garments
of those who eat the heave-offering defiled for the holy flesh.
Treading on the garments of those who eat the holy flesh defiles
for the sin-offering. Joseph, the son of Joezer, was the
most pious of the priesthood, and treading on his cloak defiled
for the holy flesh. Jochanan, the son of Gudgada, used to eat
with the purification for the holy flesh all his life; and treading
on his cloak defiled for the sin-offering.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III</head>

<p>
1. There are more weighty rules for holy things, than for
the heave-offering. Because vessels may be baptized in vessels
for the heave-offering, but not for holy things. The outside
and inside and handle (are reckoned separately) for the
heave-offering, but not for holy things. He who carries that
which defiles by treading upon it, may carry the heave-offering
but not the holy flesh. Treading on the garments of those
who eat the heave-offering defiles for the holy flesh. The
measure of the holy flesh is not as the measure of the heave-offering.
Because for the holy flesh one must loose his garments
and dry himself, and baptize and afterward bind them
up. But in the heave-offering he can bind them up and afterward
baptize himself.
</p>

<p>
2. Vessels completed in purity must be baptized for holy
things, but not for the heave-offering. A vessel unites whatever
is inside to holy things, but not to the heave-offering.
The fourth degree of legal uncleanness<note place='foot'>There are reckoned six degrees of
uncleanness: The father of fathers, the fathers, the first, second, third, and
fourth children of defilement. There are altogether twenty-nine fathers of uncleanness,
of which eleven arise from contact with a dead body.</note> is disallowed in holy
things, and the third degree in the heave-offering. In the
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
heave-offering, if one of the hands be unclean, its fellow may
be clean, but in holy things one must baptize both hands; because
each renders its fellow unclean for holy things, but not
for the heave-offering.
</p>

<p>
3. Men may eat with unwashen hands the dry meat of the
heave-offering, but not the holy flesh. The first day mourner,
and he who failed in atonement, have need of baptism for the
holy flesh, but not for the heave-offering.
</p>

<p>
4. There are weighty rules for the heave-offering, because
in Judah men are credited with the purity of wine and oil during
the whole year. And in the time of wine-pressing and oil-pressing
(men are credited) even for the heave-offering. When
the time for wine and oil pressing has passed over, and a barrel
of wine is brought for the heave-offering, it must not be received.
But one may let it stand over for the wine-pressing
next year. But if one said, <q>I put into it a quarter log of holy
wine,</q> it is credited. <q>Jugs of wine and jugs of oil which are
mixed?</q> They are credited in the time of wine-pressing and
oil-pressing, and seventy days before that time.
</p>

<p>
5. From Modiyith<note place='foot'>A city about fifteen miles from Jerusalem.</note>
and inward,<note place='foot'>Toward Jerusalem.</note> men are credited for the
purity of earthen vessels. From Modiyith and outward they
are not credited. <q>How?</q> <q>The potter, when he is selling
pots, comes inward from Modiyith.</q> One says, <q>this is the
potter,</q> and <q>these the pots,</q> and <q>these the purchasers,</q> <q>it
is credited.</q> <q>When he went outward?</q> <q>It is not
credited.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. The tax-gatherers when they enter the house, and also
the tax-gatherers when they restore the vessels, are credited
in saying, <q>we did not touch them.</q> And in Jerusalem they
are credited in holy things (that they did not defile them), and
at the time of the feast they are credited even in the heave-offering.
</p>

<p>
7. <q>He who opened his barrel of wine,<note place='foot'>This decision refers to the
case of a dealer whose wine or flour might become legally defiled by contact with the
common people.</note> and commenced
with his dough for the use of the feast?</q> R. Judah said, <q>he
may finish it</q> (after the feast). But the Sages say, <q>he must
not finish it.</q> When the feast was over, the priests looked
round for the purity of the Temple court. If the feast ended
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
on Friday, they did not look round for honor to the approaching
Sabbath. R. Judah said, <q>even they did not look round
on Thursday, because the priests are not then idle.</q>
</p>

<p>
8. <q>How did they look round for the purity of the court?</q>
<q>The priests baptized the vessels, which were in the Sanctuary,
and used to say to the people, <q>Watch and do not touch the
table and the candlestick, lest you render them unclean.</q></q> All
the vessels in the Sanctuary were double and treble, because
if the first became unclean, they could bring duplicates instead
of them. <q>All the vessels which were in the Sanctuary required
baptism<note place='foot'>The Tosephta relates, that when the
Pharisees were baptizing the candlestick, the Sadducees used to mock them
by saying, they were baptizing the sun.</note> except the golden altar, and the
brazen altar, because they are as earth.</q> The words of R. Eliezer. But
the Sages say, <q>because they were overlaid.</q>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Sanhedrin</head>

<quote rend='display'>
Judges&mdash;Judgments&mdash;The Tribunal of Seventy-one&mdash;The Great
Sanhedrin&mdash;The Small Sanhedrin&mdash;High
Priest&mdash;Funerals&mdash;King&mdash;Royal Wives&mdash;Book of the
Law&mdash;Objections to Judges&mdash;Relations&mdash;Examination
of Witnesses&mdash;Evidence&mdash;Judgments in Money and
Judgments in Souls&mdash;Form of the Sanhedrin&mdash;Appointment of
Judges&mdash;Intimidation of Witnesses&mdash;Investigation&mdash;Acquittal or
Condemnation&mdash;Stoning&mdash;Hanging&mdash;Burning&mdash;Beheading
&mdash;Strangling&mdash;Blasphemy&mdash;Idolatry&mdash;Enticing&mdash;Sorcery&mdash;A
Son Stubborn and Rebellious&mdash;Burglary&mdash;Murder&mdash;Theft&mdash;Those
Who Have No Portion in
the World to Come&mdash;The Rebellious Elder&mdash;The False Prophet&mdash;The
False Witness.
</quote>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I</head>

<p>
1. <q>Judgments for money (require) three (judges). Robbery
and beating (require) three. Damages or half damages,
double payments and payments four or five fold (require)
three.</q> <q>Constraint, and enticement, and slander (require)
three.</q> The words of R. Meier. But the Sages say, <q>slander
(requires) twenty-three judges, because there exist in it judgments
of souls.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. Stripes (require) three judges. In the name of Rabbi
Ishmael, the Sages say, <q>twenty-three.</q> <q>The intercalary
month<note place='foot'>The Jewish year is composed of
twelve lunar months. It is adapted to the solar year by the use of an intercalary
month called Veaddar&mdash;the additional Addar. Every nineteen years
there are seven occasions on which this embolismic month must be introduced
to prevent the various feasts revolving over the four seasons of the year, like
the Moslem fast of Ramadhan. Formerly the Sanhedrin arranged this intercalary
month to suit the harvest, so that if it were late, the wave sheaf and
other observances should still be kept according to their proper dates. When,
however, the Sanhedrin was suppressed by the Emperor Constantine, Hillel II
of Tiberias ruled that an intercalary month of twenty-nine days should be
added in the 3d, 6th, 8th, 11th, 13th, 17th, and 19th years of the Metonic Cycle.
This decision has since remained the Jewish standard for reckoning time.</note>
requires three. The intercalary year requires three.</q>
The words of Rabbi Meier. Rabban Simon, the son of Gamaliel,
said, <q>with three judges they begin, and with five they
discuss, and they conclude with seven; and if they concluded
with three it is intercalated.</q>
</p>

<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>

<p>
3. <q>The appointment of elders, and striking off the heifer's
neck<note place='foot'>Deut. xxi. 4.</note> (require)
three.</q> The words of Rabbi Simon. But
Rabbi Judah said, <q>five.</q> The loosing off the shoe,<note place='foot'>Deut.
xx. 5, 9.</note> and dissatisfaction in marriage (require) three.
The produce<note place='foot'>Lev. xix. 24.</note> of
the fourth year,<note place='foot'>Deut. xiv. 22-25.</note>
the second tithes, of which the value is unknown
(require) three. The valuation of holy things (requires)
three. The estimation of movable things requires
three. R. Judah said, <q>one of them must be a priest.</q> Immovable
things require nine judges and a priest; and the valuation
of a man (slave) is similar.
</p>

<p>
4. Judgments of souls (require) twenty-three judges. Bestiality
(requires) twenty-three, as is said, <q>and thou shalt slay
the woman and the beast,</q> and it is also said, <q>the beast thou
shalt slay.</q> An ox to be stoned (requires) twenty-three
judges; as is said, <q>The ox shall be stoned, and his owner also
shall be put to death,</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxi.
29.</note> as is the death of the owner, so is the
death of the ox. The wolf, and the lion, and the bear, and the
leopard, and the panther, and the serpent, are to be put to
death with twenty-three judges. R. Eliezer said, <q>everyone
who first killed them has gained honor.</q> R. Akiba said, <q>they
are to be put to death after a judgment with twenty-three
(judges).</q>
</p>

<p>
5. A tribe must not be judged, nor a false prophet, nor a
high priest, save before the tribunal of seventy-one. And
soldiers must not go forth to lawful warfare, save by a decree
of the tribunal of seventy-one. Men must not add to the city
or to the temple courts, save by a decision of the tribunal of
seventy-one. They must not appoint judges to the tribes, save
by a decision of the tribunal of seventy-one. A city must not
be excluded, save by the tribunal of seventy-one. And the
tribunal must not exclude a city on the border, nor exclude
three cities, but only one or two.
</p>

<p>
6. The Great Sanhedrin consisted of seventy-one members,
and the small one of twenty-three. And whence know we
that the great one contained seventy-one? as is said, <q>Gather
unto me seventy men of the elders of Israel</q>,<note place='foot'>Num.
xi. 17.</note> and Moses
over them. There are seventy-one. R. Judah said <q>seventy.</q>
And whence know we that the small one consisted of twenty-three?
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>
as is said, <q>Then the congregation shall judge</q>;<note place='foot'>Num.
xxxv. 24, 25. A congregation, or <q>minyan,</q> must not be less than
ten men. If there be 10,000 women they cannot form a minyan. The Lord Jesus
more mercifully promises His presence to <q>two or three gathered together.</q>
Matt. xviii. 20.</note> <q>and
the congregation shall deliver.</q> A congregation to judge,
and a congregation to deliver, there is twenty. And whence
know we that a congregation required ten? as is said, <q>How
long shall I bear with this evil congregation?</q><note place='foot'>Num.
xiv. 27.</note> Joshua and
Caleb were excepted. <q>And whence know we to produce the
other three?</q> From the meaning, as is said, <q>Thou shalt not
follow a multitude to do evil.</q><note place='foot'>Exod.
xxiii. 2.</note> I am hearing that <q>I shall
be with them for good.</q> If so, why is it said, <q>to decline
after many to wrest judgment</q>?<note place='foot'>Exod. xxiii.
2.</note> <q>Because thy inclinations
to good do not equal thy inclinations to evil. Thy inclinations
to good are by the report of one. Thy inclinations to
evil are by the report of two. And a tribunal must not be
balanced. Another must be added. There are twenty-three.</q>
<q>And how populous must be the city suited for judges?</q>
<q>One hundred and twenty.</q> R. Nehemiah said <q>230 to
represent twenty-three overseers of tens.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II</head>

<p>
1. The high-priest may judge, and be judged.<note place='foot'>The Great Sanhedrin
could whip a high-priest for certain offences, and afterward
restore him to his office.</note> He may bear witness, and witness
may be borne against him. He may have his shoe loosed, and the shoe
may be loosed for his wife.<note place='foot'>Deut. xxv. 9.</note>
His brother may take his wife, but he must not take his
brother's wife, because he is prevented from marrying a widow.
If there happened a death in his family, he must not go immediately
behind the bier. <q>But when the (mourners) are concealed
(in a street), then he is discovered (to the public). They
are discovered to the public, and he is concealed in a street.
And he may go with them to the entrance gate of the city.</q>
The words of R. Meier. R. Judah said, <q>he must not depart
from the sanctuary</q>; as is said, <q>neither shall he go out of
the sanctuary.</q><note place='foot'>Lev. xxi.
12.</note> And when he comforts others, the fashion
of all the people is to pass one after the other, and the deputy
priest puts him in the middle between himself and the people.
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
But when he is comforted by others, all the people say to him,
<q>we are thy atonement.</q> And he says to them, <q>you shall
be blessed from heaven.</q> And at the first meal<note place='foot'>2
Sam. iii. 35.</note> after a funeral,
all the people recline on the ground, and he sits on a stool.
</p>

<p>
2. The king neither judges, nor is he judged. He neither
bears witness, nor is witness borne against him. He does
not unloose the shoe, and the shoe is not unloosed for his
wife. He does not marry his brother's wife, nor is his wife
married by his brother. R. Judah said, <q>if he pleased he may
unloose the shoe, or marry his brother's wife. He is remembered
in prayer for good.</q> The Sages said to him, <q>we do
not hear him (the king) (for unloosing the shoe) and his widow
must not marry.</q> R. Judah said, <q>the king may marry the
widow of a king, as we find with David that he married the
widow of Saul</q>; as is said, <q>And I gave thee thy master's
house, and thy master's wives into thy bosom.</q><note place='foot'>2
Sam. xii. 8.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. If there happened a death in his family, he goes not out
from the entrance of his palace. R. Judah said, <q>if he pleases
to go after the bier he may go, as we find in David that he
went after the bier of Abner</q>; as is said, <q>And King David
himself followed the bier.</q><note place='foot'>2
Sam. iii. 31.</note> The Sages said to him, <q>this
only happened to pacify the people.</q> And at the first meal
after a funeral, all the people recline on the ground, and he sits
on a sofa.
</p>

<p>
4. And he may go forth to lawful warfare by order of the
supreme court of seventy-one, and he may break down a road
for himself, and none can prevent him. The road of a king
is without measure, and all the people plunder and lay it before
him. And he takes part first. He must not multiply wives
beyond eighteen. R. Judah said, <q>he may multiply wives
for himself so long as they do not turn away his heart.</q> R.
Simon said, <q>even if one turn away his heart, he should not
marry her.</q> If so, wherefore is it said, <q>he must not multiply
for himself wives, even though they be as Abigail</q>? He must
not multiply horses, except sufficient for his own riding. And
silver and gold he must not multiply much, only sufficient to
pay his own expenses. And he must write a book of the law
for himself. When he goes out to war, he must bring it with
him. When he returns, he must bring it with him. If he sit
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
in judgment it is with him. When he is seated it is before him,
as is said, <q>And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein
all the days of his life.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. xvii. 19.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. None may ride on his horse, and none may sit on his
chair, and none may use his sceptre, and none may see him
shaving, either when he is naked, or in the bath, as is said,
<q>Thou shalt in any wise set him king over thee,</q><note place='foot'>Deut.
xvii. 15.</note> that his
dread be upon thee.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III</head>

<p>
1. <q>Judgments in money matters (require) three judges.
This party chooses for himself one, and the other party chooses
for himself one. And both parties choose another.</q> The
words of R. Meier. But the Sages say, <q>the two judges
choose for themselves the other.</q> <q>This one may declare the
judge of that one illegal. And that one may declare the
judge of this one illegal.</q> The words of R. Meier. But the
Sages say, <q>it is only when witness can be brought against
them that they are related or unlawful.</q> <q>But if they be
righteous or experienced, they must not be declared illegal.</q>
<q>This one may declare illegal the witness of that one. And
that one may declare illegal the witness of this one.</q> The
words of R. Meier. But the Sages say, <q>it is only when witness
can be brought against them that they are related or unlawful,
but if they be righteous they must not be declared
illegal.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. One said to the other, <q>I trust my father,</q> <q>I trust
thy father,</q> <q>I trust three cowherds.</q> R. Meier said, <q>he
may change his mind.</q> But the Sages say, <q>he must not
change.</q> If he must give an oath to his companion, and he
said to him, <q>vow to me by the life of thy head</q>? R. Meier
said, <q>he may change his mind.</q> But the Sages say, <q>he
must not change his mind.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. And these are illegal (as judges or witnesses), one who
played at cards, or lent on usury, or bet on the flight of doves,
or trades in the Sabbatical year. R. Simon said, <q>at first they
were called gatherers on the Sabbatical year; when they were
forced by Gentiles to cultivate the ground, they changed to
<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>
call them traders on the Sabbatical year.</q> R. Judah said, <q>it
is only when they have no other occupation but this one alone:
but if they have another occupation, they are allowed.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. And these are related, his father and his brother, and
the brethren of his father, and the brethren of his mother, and
the husband of his sister, and the husband of his father's
sister, and the husband of his mother's sister. And the husband
of his mother and his father-in-law, and his brother-in-law,
they, their children, and their sons-in-law, and his step-son
alone. R. José said, <q>this was the teaching of R. Akiba;
but the first teaching was, his uncle and the son of his uncle,
and all suitable for inheritance, and everyone related to him
at the present time.</q> <q>One was related and became
estranged?</q> <q>He is lawful.</q> R. Judah said, <q>even if his
daughter died, and he has children left by her, they are related.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. <q>Who is a friend? and who is an enemy?</q> <q>A friend
is the bridegroom's best man, an enemy is everyone who has
not spoken with him three days in malice.</q> The Sages replied
to him, <q>Israelites are not so suspicious.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. <q>How are witnesses examined?</q> <q>They are brought
in and intimidated; and all other men are driven out.</q> And
the chief of the witnesses is left, and they say to him, <q>tell
us how do you know that this man is indebted to that man?</q>
If the witness said, <q>he told me that I am indebted to him</q>&mdash;<q>such
a man told me that he is indebted to him</q>&mdash;he has
said nothing, till he shall say, <q>he acknowledged in our presence
that he owed him 200 zuz.</q> And afterward the second
witness is brought in, and examined. If their statements were
found agreeing, the judges held a conversation. Two of them
said <q>he is clear,</q> and one said <q>he is indebted</q>? <q>He is
cleared.</q> <q>Two said, he is indebted, and one said, he is
clear?</q> <q>He is indebted.</q> <q>One said he is clear, and one
said he is indebted? And even if two pronounced him clear
or indebted, and one said, <q>I don't know</q>?</q> <q>The judges
must be increased.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. The matter is finished. They bring in the plaintiff and
defendant. The chief judge says, <q>thou, such a one, art clear;
thou such a one, art indebted.</q> <q>And whence know we
that one of the judges on going out should not say, <q>I was
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
for clearing him, but my colleagues pronounced him indebted,
but what shall I do when my colleagues are too many for
me</q>?</q> <q>Of this man it is said, <q>Thou shalt not go up and
down as a tale-bearer among thy people</q>;<note place='foot'>Lev.
xix. 16.</note> and it is said, <q>A tale-bearer revealeth
secrets.</q></q><note place='foot'>Prov. xi. 13.</note>
</p>

<p>
8. At any time the one condemned may bring evidence and
annul the judgment. The judges said to him, <q>bring all your
evidence within thirty days from this date.</q> If he brought
them within thirty days, it is annulled, if after thirty days, it is
not annulled. Rabban Simon, the son of Gamaliel, said,
<q>what shall he do if he did not find them within thirty days,
but found them after thirty days?</q> <q>The judges said to him,
<q>bring witnesses</q>; and he said, <q>I have no witnesses</q>; they
said, <q>bring evidence</q>; and he said, <q>I have no evidence</q>;
but afterward he found evidence, and found witnesses?</q>
<q>They are nothing.</q> Rabban Simon, the son of Gamaliel,
said, <q>what shall he do if he did not know that he had witnesses,
and found witnesses; he did not know that he had evidence,
and found evidence?</q> <q>They said to him, <q>bring
witnesses</q>; he said, <q>I have no witnesses.</q> <q>Bring evidence,</q>
and he said, <q>I have no evidence.</q></q> <q>He saw that he will
be pronounced indebted in judgment, and he said, <q>approach
such a one, and such a one, and bear witness for me,</q> or <q>he
pulled out evidence from his pocket</q>?</q> <q>It is nothing.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV</head>

<p>
1. Judgments in money and judgments in souls must be
equally inquired into and investigated; as is said, <q>Ye shall
have one manner of law.</q><note place='foot'>Lev. xxiv.
22.</note> <q>What is the difference between
judgments in money and judgments in souls?</q> <q>Judgments
in money (require) three judges, judgments in souls twenty-three.
Judgments in money open the case either for clearing
or proving indebted, but judgments of souls open the case for
clearing, and the case is not opened for condemning. Judgments
in money are balanced by one judge either for clearing
or proving indebted; but judgments in souls are balanced by
one for clearing and by two for condemning. Judgments in
money may be reversed either for clearing or proving indebted;
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
but judgments in souls may be reversed for clearing, but must
not be reversed for condemnation. All may express an opinion
on judgments in money for clearing or proving indebted. All
may express an opinion on judgments in souls for clearing,
but all must not express an opinion for condemnation. He
who has expressed an opinion on judgments in money for
proving indebted, may express an opinion for clearing, and he
who has expressed an opinion for clearing, may express an
opinion for proving indebted. He who has expressed an
opinion on judgments in souls for condemnation may express
an opinion for clearing, but he who has expressed an opinion
for clearing must not reverse it to express an opinion for condemnation.
Judgments in money are conducted by day and
settled by night. Judgments in souls are conducted by day
and settled by day. Judgments in money are settled on the
same day, either for clearing or proving indebted. Judgments
in souls are finished on the same day for clearing, and on the
day after it for condemnation&mdash;wherefore there can be no
judgments on Friday or on the eve of a festival.</q><note place='foot'>This
rule was violated in the case of our Lord Jesus Christ. Matt. xxvi.
xxvii.; Mark xiv.; Luke xxii. xxiii.; John xix.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. Judgments in legal uncleanness and legal cleansings begin
with the Supreme (judge). Judgments in souls begin with
a judge at his side. All are eligible to pronounce judgments
in money matters, but all are not eligible to pronounce judgments
in souls&mdash;only priests, Levites, and Israelites who can
intermarry into the priesthood.
</p>

<p>
3. The Sanhedrin was like half a round threshing-floor,
in order that the members might observe each other. And
two scribes of the judges stood before them&mdash;one on the right
and one on the left. And they wrote the sentence of acquittal,
and the sentence of condemnation. R. Judah said, <q>three;
one scribe wrote the sentence of acquittal, and one wrote the
sentence of condemnation; and the third wrote both the sentence
of acquittal and the sentence of condemnation.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. And three rows of the disciples of the wise sat before
them. And each one knew his place. When it was necessary
to appoint a judge, they appointed one from the first row. One
from the second row came instead of him into the first, and
one from the third row came instead of him into the second,
<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>
and they selected another from the congregation, and they
seated him in the third row, and he did not sit in the place of
his predecessor, but he sat in a place suitable for himself.
</p>

<p>
5. <q>How did the judges intimidate witnesses in the testimony
for souls?</q> <q>They introduced them, and intimidated
them.</q> <q>Perhaps you are speaking from guess? or from
hearsay? witness from witness? or from a trustworthy man
we heard it?</q> Or, perhaps, <q>you don't know that at the last
we shall proceed to inquire into your own character and investigate
it.</q> <q>Have a knowledge that the judgments of
money are not as the judgments of souls. Judgments for
money, when the man pays the money he has atoned. In
judgments for souls his blood and the blood of his posterity
are suspended till the end of the world.</q> So we find it with
Cain when he slew his brother. It is said of him,<note place='foot'>Gen.
iv. 10.</note> <q>the voice
of thy brother's bloods crieth.</q> He does not say thy brother's
blood, but bloods of thy brother, his blood and the blood of his
posterity. Another thing is also meant, that thy brother's
bloods are spattered on wood, and on stones. Therefore man
is created single, to teach thee that everyone who destroys one
soul from Israel, to him is the verse applicable, as if he destroys
a full world. And everyone who supports one soul in Israel,
to him is the verse applicable, as if he supports the full world.
And it is also said, for the peace of creation, that no man
may justly say to his companion, my father is greater than
thine. And that the Epicureans should not say, that there are
more Creators in the heavens, and it is also said, to show forth
the greatness of the Holy One, blessed be He! When man
stamps many coins with one stamp, all are alike. But the King
of Kings, the Holy One, blessed be He! stamped every man
with the stamp of the first Adam, and no one of them is like
his companion; therefore everyone is bound to say, <q>for my
sake was the world created.</q> But, perhaps, the witnesses will
say <q>what is this trouble to us?</q> But is it not already said,
<q>And is a witness, whether he hath seen or known of it; if
he do not utter it?</q><note place='foot'>Lev. v. 1.</note>
But perhaps the witnesses will say, <q>what is it to us, to be
guilty of this man's blood?</q> But is it not already said,
<q>When the wicked perish, there is shouting</q>?<note place='foot'>Prov.
xi. 10.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V</head>

<p>
1. The witnesses were examined with seven investigations.
<q>In what Sabbatical year?</q> <q>In what year?</q> <q>In what
month?</q> <q>What date in the month?</q> <q>What day?</q> <q>What
hour?</q> <q>What place?</q> R. José said, <q>What day?</q> <q>What
hour?</q> <q>What place?</q> <q>Did you know him?</q> <q>Did
you warn him?</q> In a case of idolatry, <q>whom did he serve?</q>
<q>And with what did he serve?</q>
</p>

<p>
2. Every judge who extends examinations is praiseworthy.
It happened that the son of Zacchai examined (even) on the
stems of figs. And what difference is there between investigations
and examinations? In investigations if one say, <q>I
don't know,</q> their witness is worthless. In examinations,
if one say, <q>I don't know,</q> and even two say, <q>we don't
know,</q> their witness stands. Whether in investigations or
examinations, when they contradict each other, their witness
is worthless.
</p>

<p>
3. One witness said, <q>on the second of the month,</q> and
another witness said, <q>the third of the month.</q> Their witness
stands. Because one knows of the intercalary month,
and another does not know of the intercalary month. One
said, <q>on the third,</q> and another said, <q>on the fifth</q>; their
witness is worthless. One said, <q>at the second hour,</q> and
another said, <q>at the third hour</q>; their witness stands. One
said, <q>at the third,</q> and another said, <q>at the fifth</q>; their
witness is worthless. R. Judah said, <q>it stands.</q> One said,
<q>on the fifth,</q> and another said, <q>on the seventh</q>; their
witness is worthless, because at the fifth (hour) the sun is in
the east, and at the seventh hour the sun is in the west.
</p>

<p>
4. And afterward they introduce the second (witness) and
examine him. If both their statements agree, they open the
case with clearing. One of the witnesses says, <q>I possess information
to clear him.</q> Or one of the disciples of the Sanhedrin
says, <q>I possess information for condemning.</q> They
order him to keep silence. One of the disciples of the Sanhedrin
says, <q>I possess information to clear him.</q> They
bring him up, and seat him between the judges, and he did not
go down during the whole day. If there be substantial information,
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
they give him a hearing. And even when he (the
accused) says, <q>I possess information for clearing myself,</q>
the judges give him a hearing; only there must be substantial
information in his words.
</p>

<p>
5. If the judges found him clear, they released him, but
if not they deferred his judgment till the morrow. They conversed
in pairs, and reduced their eating, and they drank no
wine all the day, and discussed the matter the whole night.
And on the morrow they came very early to the judgment
hall. He who was for clearing said, <q>I was for clearing, and
I am for clearing in my place.</q> And he who was for condemning
said, <q>I was for condemning, and I am for condemning
in my place.</q> He who pronounced for condemning, could
pronounce for clearing, but he who pronounced for clearing,
could not turn round and pronounce for condemning. If the
judges erred in a matter, the two scribes of the judges recalled
it to their memory. If they found him clear, they released him:
but if not, they stood to be counted. <q>Twelve cleared him,
and eleven condemned?</q> <q>He is clear.</q> <q>Twelve condemned
him, and eleven cleared him, and even eleven cleared,
and eleven condemned,</q> and one said, <q>I don't know.</q> And
even twenty-two cleared or condemned, and one said, <q>I don't
know?</q> <q>They must add judges.</q> <q>How many do they
add as judges two by two?</q> <q>Up to seventy-one.</q> <q>Thirty-six
cleared him, and thirty-five condemned him?</q> <q>He is
clear.</q> <q>Thirty-six condemned him, and thirty-five cleared
him?</q> <q>They disputed with each other until one of the condemning
party acknowledged the statement of the clearing
party.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI</head>

<p>
1. When the judgment was finished, they brought him forth
to stone him.<note place='foot'>Before executing a criminal, a quantity
of frankincense in a cup of wine was given to him to stupefy him and
render him insensible to pain. The compassionate ladies of Jerusalem generally
provided this draught at their own cost. This custom was in obedience
to Prov. xxxi. 6, <q>Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish,
and wine unto those that be of heavy hearts.</q></note>
The place of stoning was outside the judgment-hall;
as is said, <q>Bring him forth that hath cursed.</q><note place='foot'>Lev.
xxiv. 14.</note>
One stood at the door of the judgment-hall with towels in his
hand, and another man rode a horse at a distance from him,
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>
but so that he might see him. If one said, <q>I have something
to tell for clearing,</q> this one waved the towels, and the other
galloped his horse, and stopped the accused. And even though
he himself said, <q>I have something to tell to clear myself,</q> they
brought him back as many as four or five times, only there
must be substance in his words. If they found him clear, they
freed him; but if not, they took him forth to stone him. And
a herald preceded him (crying), <q>Such a one, the son of such
a one, is brought out for stoning, because he committed such
a transgression, and so and so are witnesses; let everyone
who knows aught for clearing him come forth and tell it.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. When he was ten cubits from the place of stoning, they
said to him <q>confess,</q> as it is the custom of all about to die to
confess, since to everyone who confesses there is a portion in
the world to come. So we find with Achan when Joshua said
to him, <q>My son, give, I pray thee, glory to the Lord God of
Israel, and make confession unto him.</q><note place='foot'>Josh.
vii. 19, 20, 25</note> And Achan answered
Joshua, and said, <q>Indeed, I have sinned against the
Lord God of Israel, and thus and thus I have done.</q> <q>And
from whence know we that his confession made atonement for
him?</q> <q>As it is said, <q>And Joshua said, Why hast thou
troubled us? the Lord shall trouble thee this day. This day
thou art troubled, but thou shalt not be troubled in the world
to come.</q></q> And if he did not know how to confess, they told
him to say, <q>let my death be an atonement for all my sins.</q>
Rabbi Judah said, <q>if he knew that he was falsely condemned,
he said, <q>let my death be an atonement for all my sins, except
this one</q>;</q> the (Sages) said, <q>if so, every man will speak thus
to make themselves innocent.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. When he was four cubits from the place of stoning, they
stripped off his garments. <q>If a man, they covered him in
front; if a woman, before and behind.</q> The words of Rabbi
Judah. But the Sages say <q>a man was stoned naked, but the
woman was not stoned naked.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. The place of stoning was two men high. One of the witnesses
thrust him down on his loins. If he turned on his heart,
the witness must turn him on his loins. If he died with that
thrust it was finished; but if not, the second (witness) took the
stone, and cast it upon his heart. If he died with that blow, the
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>
stoning was finished. But if not, he was stoned by all Israel,
as is said, <q>The hands of the witnesses shall be first upon him
to put him to death, and afterward the hands of all the
people.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. xvii. 7.</note>
<q>All who were stoned were hung up.</q> The words of Rabbi
Eliezer. But the Sages say, <q>none were hung up, save the
blasphemer and the idolater.</q> <q>The man is to be hung with
his face toward the people, but the woman with her face toward
the wood.</q> The words of Rabbi Eliezer. But the Sages
say, <q>the man was hung up, but they do not hang up a
woman.</q> Rabbi Eleazar said to them, <q>and did not Simon,
the son of Shatach, hang women in Askalon?</q> They said
to him, <q>he hung up eighty women (witches), and two could
not be judged, in one day.</q> <q>How did they hang him?</q>
<q>They sunk a beam in the ground, and a traverse beam proceeded
from it, and they bound his hands, one over the other,
and hung him up</q> (by them). R. José said, <q>the beam was
inclined against the wall, and he was hung upon it, just as the
butchers do.</q> And they loosed him immediately afterward.
<q>But if he was out all night?</q> <q>It was a transgression of
a negative command, as is said, <q>His body shall not remain all
night upon the tree, but thou shalt in any wise bury him that
day (for he that is hanged is accursed of God),</q></q><note place='foot'>Deut.
xxi. 23.</note> etc. As one says, <q>wherefore is this one hung?</q> <q>Because he
blasphemed the NAME, and it follows that the heavenly NAME
is profaned.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. Rabbi Meier said, <q>when man is sorrowful,<note place='foot'>This
supposes a man sorrowful, because he is obliged to punish his own
son.</note> what language does the
Shekinah<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, the Divine Presence. The
luminous cloud of glory in the Holy of Holies.</note> make him to utter?</q> If it be
lawful so to speak, <q>my head makes me ashamed, my arm
makes me ashamed.</q> If, to speak after the manner of men,
OMNIPRESENCE is sorrowful, when the blood of the wicked
is poured out, how much more sorrowful is He for the blood of
the righteous? And not in the case of the condemned alone,
but everyone who leaves his dead overnight, is a transgressor
of a negative command. If they left him for the sake of
honor, to bring a coffin and a shroud for him, there is no transgression.
But they did not bury him (the condemned) in the
sepulchres of his fathers. And there were two burial grounds
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>
prepared for the Judgment Hall&mdash;one for the stoned and the
burned, and one for those beheaded and strangled.
</p>

<p>
6. When the flesh of the condemned was consumed, they
gathered his bones and buried them in their proper place; and
his relatives came and asked after the peace of the judges, and
the peace of the witnesses, as much as to say, <q>know there is
nothing in our hearts against you, as your judgment was
true.</q> And they did not mourn, but were gloomy, since gloominess
is only in the heart.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VII</head>

<p>
1. Four punishments were permitted to the supreme court&mdash;stoning,
burning, beheading, and strangling. R. Simon
said, <q>burning, stoning, strangling, and beheading.</q> The
preceding chapter is the order of stoning.
</p>

<p>
2. The order for those burned was to be sunk in dung to
their knees. And men put a hard towel in a soft one, and encircled
his neck. One pulled on one side, and another pulled
on the other side, till the condemned opened his mouth. And
one lit a wick, and cast it into his mouth, and it went down to
his bowels, and it consumed his intestines. R. Judah said,
<q>if he died in their hands, they did not complete in him the
order of burning; only they opened his mouth with tongs
against his will, and lit the wick, and cast it into his mouth,
and it went down to his bowels and consumed his intestines.</q>
Said R. Eleazar the son of Zadok, <q>it happened with the
daughter of a priest, who was immoral, that they surrounded
her with dry branches and burned her.</q> The Sages replied,
<q>because the court at that time was unskilled.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. The order of those beheaded was to have their heads
struck off with a sword, as is the custom of governments.
R. Judah said, <q>that was an abuse; they only rested his head
on a block, and hewed it off with an axe.</q> The Sages replied
to him, <q>no death is a greater abuse than that.</q> The order
for those strangled was, that they were sunk down in dung to
their knees, and they put a hard towel inside a soft one, and encircled
his neck. One pulled on one side, and another pulled
on the other side, till his soul departed.
</p>

<p>
4. These were stoned; ... a blasphemer, and an
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
idolater, and he who gave his seed to Molech, and one with a
familiar spirit,<note place='foot'>The words in the original, <q>Baal
Aob,</q> are supposed by some to denote a ventriloquist from <q>Aob,</q> meaning a
<q>bottle</q> or <q>stomach.</q> <q>Aob</q> seems, however, much more likely to be
allied to the Coptic word for <q>a serpent</q> or <q>Python.</q> Acts xvi.
16.</note> and a wizard, and he who profaned the Sabbath,
and he who cursed father or mother, and he who came to
a betrothed maid, and an enticer to idolatry, and a withdrawer
to idolatry, and a sorcerer, and a son stubborn and
rebellious.
</p>

<p>
5. The blasphemer was not guilty till he expressed the
NAME. Said R. Joshua, the son of Korcha, every day they
examined the witnesses under a substituted (feigned) name,
for example, <q>José shall beat José.</q> When the judgment was
finished, they could not execute him under the nickname, but
they withdrew all men outside, and interrogated the principal
witness, and said to him, <q>tell us clearly what thou hast
heard?</q> and he said it. And the judges stood up on their
feet, and rent their garments,<note place='foot'>Matt. xxvi.
65.</note> and they were never sewn
again. And the second witness said, <q>even I (heard) as he,</q>
and the third said, <q>even I (heard) as he.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. One committed idolatry, whether he served the idol, or
sacrificed to it, or burned incense to it, or made a libation to it,
or bowed down to it, or accepted it for his god. And also, he
who said to it, <q>thou art my God.</q> But he who embraced it,
and kissed it, and honored it, and dusted it, and washed it, and
anointed it, and dressed it, and put shoes on it, transgressed
a negative command. He who vowed in its name, and performed
the vow in its name, transgressed a negative command.
<q>He exposed himself to Baal peor?</q> <q>That is positive service.</q>
<q>He cast a stone to Mercury?</q> <q>That is positive
service.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. He who gave his seed to Molech<note place='foot'>The image of Molech was made of
brass. It was hollow within and heated with fire outside. It stood in the valley
of Hinnom without the walls of Jerusalem. Kimchi says the image of
Molech contained seven chapels. These chapels are supposed by some to represent
the seven planets. In the first chapel flowers were offered; in the second,
turtle doves or young pigeons; in the third, lambs; in the fourth, rams;
in the fifth, calves; in the sixth, oxen; <q>but whosoever offered his son, they
opened to him the seventh chapel.</q> The face of Molech was like the face of
a calf, and the image stretched forth its hands <q>as a man who opens his hands
to receive something of his neighbor.</q> <q>They kindled the image with fire, and
the priests took the babe and put it into the hands of Molech, and the babe
gave up the ghost.</q> They called it Tophet; because they made a noise with
drums (<q>tophim</q>), that the father might not hear the screams of his child
and have pity upon him. And they called it Hinnom, because the child
roared (<q>menahem</q>) in his anguish. Others say it was called Hinnom, because
the priests used to say, <q>May it profit thee&mdash;may it be sweet to
thee.</q></note> is not guilty till he hand
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>
it to Molech, and pass it through the fire. <q>If he hand it to
Molech, and do not pass it through the fire, (or if) he passed
it through the fire, and did not hand it to Molech?</q> <q>He is
not guilty till he hand it to Molech, and pass it through the
fire.</q> One has a familiar spirit, when the Python speaks from
his arm. But the wizard speaks with his mouth. These are
to be stoned, and inquiry from them is forbidden.
</p>

<p>
8. He who profaned the Sabbath by aught which renders
him guilty of presumption is to be cut off;<note place='foot'>Cutting off is
generally supposed to have extended to the family as well as
the guilty person. It seems to have included the future as well as the present
life.</note> but if he profaned
the Sabbath in error, a sin-offering (is required) from him.
He who cursed father or mother is not guilty till he curse them
by the NAME. <q>If he curse them with a substituted name of
God?</q> R. Meier pronounces him <q>guilty</q>; but the Sages
<q>free him.</q>
</p>

<p>
9. <q>If one came to a betrothed maid?</q> <q>He is not guilty,
except she be a virgin, and betrothed, and in the house of her
father.</q> <q>If two came to her?</q> <q>The first is to be stoned
and the second strangled.</q>
</p>

<p>
10. <q>The enticer to idolatry?</q> <q>This ordinary man enticed
an ordinary man; he said to him, <q>there is an object
of fear in such a place, so it eats, so it drinks, so it does good,
so it does evil.</q></q> Of all who are guilty of death in the law,
we are not to set witnesses in concealment to convict them,
except in this case of an enticer to idolatry. When he has
spoken of his idolatry to two persons, they as witnesses bring
him to the judgment-hall, and stone him. If he spoke thus
to one, this one replies, <q>I have companions who desire to
hear so and so.</q> <q>If he be cunning, and he does not speak
before them?</q> <q>Witnesses are concealed behind a wall, and
he says to the idolater, <q>tell me what thou saidst to me alone,</q>
and the idolater told him. And he replied to him, <q>how can
we leave our God, who is in heaven, and go and serve wood and
stone?</q></q> <q>If the idolater returned from his sin, it is well; but
if he said, <q>so is our duty, and so it is excellent for us,</q> they who
stood behind the wall bring him to the judgment-hall, and
stone him; if he said, <q>I shall serve, I shall go and serve, let
us go and serve; I will sacrifice, I will go and sacrifice, let us
go and sacrifice; I will burn incense, I will go and burn incense,
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
let us go and burn incense; I will pour a libation, I will
go and pour a libation, let us go and pour a libation; I will
bow down, I will go and bow down, let us go and bow down</q>&mdash;the
withdrawer is he who says, <q>let us go and serve idols.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
11. The sorcerer, who has done the act, is guilty of death,
but he is not guilty who merely deludes the eyes. R. Akiba said
in the name of R. Joshua, <q>two sorcerers can gather cucumbers&mdash;one
gathers them and is free, but another gathers them
and is guilty. He who has performed the act is guilty. He
who has merely deluded the eyes is free.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VIII</head>

<p>
1. A son stubborn and rebellious.<note place='foot'>Deut. xxi.
18.</note> <q>From what time is
he decidedly a son stubborn and rebellious?</q> <q>From the
time the two hairs have come, and up to the time the beard has
sprouted; but the Sages spoke in modest language. As is
usually said, when a man has a son&mdash;a son, but not a daughter;
a son, but not a man; a child as yet free from coming under
the rule of the commandments.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. <q>From what time is he guilty?</q> <q>From the time he
ate three-quarters of a pound of flesh, and drank half a log of
Italian wine.</q> R. José said, <q>a pound of flesh and a log of
wine.</q> <q>He ate it in an appointed feast; he ate it in the intercalary
month; he ate it during the second tithes in Jerusalem;
he ate of a carcass and of things torn, abominable things
and creeping things; he ate of that which had not paid tithes,
and the first tithes before the heave-offering was separated
from them and the second tithes and holy things which were
not redeemed; he ate of a thing which is commanded, and of
a thing which is a transgression; he ate every kind of meat,
but he did not eat flesh; he drank every kind of fluid, but he
did not drink wine?</q> <q>He is not a son stubborn and rebellious
till he eat flesh and drink wine,</q> as is said, <q>A glutton and a
drunkard</q>;<note place='foot'>Deut. xxi. 20.</note> and
even though there is no conclusive evidence,
there is a memorial to the matter, as is said, <q>Be not among
winebibbers; among riotous eaters of flesh.</q><note place='foot'>Prov. xxiii. 20.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. <q>If he steal it from his father, and eat it (with permission)
on the property of his father; from others, and eat it
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>
on the property of others; from others, and eat it on the
property of his father?</q> <q>He is not a son stubborn and rebellious
till he steal it from his father and eat it on the property
of others.</q> R. José, the son of R. Judah, said, <q>till he steal
it from his father and from his mother.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. <q>If his father desires (his punishment), and his
mother does not desire it; his father does not desire it, and his
mother does desire it?</q> <q>He is not declared a son stubborn
and rebellious until both of them desire it.</q> R. Judah said,
<q>if his mother was not suitable for his father, he is not declared
a son stubborn and rebellious.</q> <q>One of them was
broken-handed, or lame, or dumb, or blind, or deaf?</q> <q>He is
not declared a son stubborn and rebellious,</q> as is said, <q><q>Then
shall his father and his mother lay hold on him,</q><note place='foot'>Deut.
xxi. 19, 20.</note> which is
impossible if they be broken-handed; <q>and bring him out,</q>
which is impossible if they be lame; <q>and they shall say,</q>
which is impossible if they be dumb; <q>this our son,</q> which is
impossible if they be blind; <q>he will not obey our voice,</q> which
is impossible if they be deaf. They must warn him before
three judges, and then flog him.</q> <q>He returned to his bad
habits?</q> <q>He is to be judged before twenty-three judges,
but he is not to be stoned till the three first (judges) are present,
as is said, <q>this our son</q> who was flogged before you.</q>
<q>He ran away before his judgment was finished, and afterward
came to puberty?</q> <q>He is free.</q> <q>But if he ran
away after the decision and then came to puberty?</q> <q>He is
guilty.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. A son stubborn and rebellious is judged for the sake of his
future prospects. The law says, <q>better die when he is innocent,
and not die when he is guilty.</q> The death of the wicked
is pleasant for them, and pleasant for the world; but the death
of the righteous is evil for them, and evil for the world. Wine
and sleep are pleasant to the wicked, and pleasant to the world;
but for the righteous, it is evil for them, and evil for the
world. Separation for the wicked is pleasant for them, and
pleasant for the world; but for the righteous, it is evil for them,
and evil for the world. Union for the wicked is evil for
them, and evil for the world; but for the righteous, it is pleasant
for them, and pleasant for the world. Rest for the wicked
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
is evil for them, and evil for the world; but for the righteous, it
is pleasant for them, and pleasant for the world.
</p>

<p>
6. If one engaged in burglary, he is judged for the sake of
his future prospects. <q>He engaged in burglary and broke
a barrel?</q> <q>If the owner might not kill him, he must pay
for the barrel; but if the owner might kill him, he is freed from
paying for the barrel.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. These are they who are rescued<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>,
they are saved from crime by immediately depriving them of life.
This summary mode of procedure was called <q>the rebel's beating.</q> It was a
kind of lynch law inflicted by the people at once. John viii. 59.</note>
with their souls&mdash;he
who pursued after his companion to kill him, and one after
a betrothed girl. But one about to profane the Sabbath, and
one about to serve idols, such cannot be saved with their
souls.<note place='foot'>As the former class of intending
criminals could at once be killed, so this latter class must be guilty of the
act, and they are then judged for it.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IX</head>

<p>
1. And these are to be beheaded. The murderer and the
men of a city withdrawn to idolatry. <q>The murderer who
smote his neighbor with a stone or iron, and he pressed him
down in the midst of the water, or in the midst of fire, and he
could not come out from thence, and he died?</q> <q>He is
guilty.</q> <q>He pushed him into the midst of water, or into the
midst of fire, and he could come out, but he died?</q> <q>He
is free.</q> <q>He encouraged a dog against him, he encouraged
a serpent against him?</q> <q>He is free.</q> <q>He caused a serpent
to bite him?</q> Rabbi Judah declared him <q>guilty,</q> but
the Sages <q>freed him.</q> <q>He smote his companion either with
a stone or his fist, and he was counted for dead, and he became
lighter, and afterward became heavier, and died?</q> <q>He is
guilty.</q> R. Nehemiah said, <q>he is free, because there are
extenuating circumstances in the matter.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. <q>His intention was to kill a beast, and he killed a man&mdash;a
foreigner, and he killed an Israelite&mdash;a premature birth, and
he killed a timely child?</q> <q>He is free.</q> <q>His intention was
to smite his loins, and there was not sufficient force in the blow
to cause death in his loins, and it passed to his heart, and there
was sufficient force in the blow to cause death in his heart, and
he died?</q> <q>He is free.</q> <q>His intention was to smite him
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>
on his heart, and there was sufficient force in the blow to cause
death on his heart, and it passed on to his loins, and there was
not sufficient force in the blow to cause death on his loins, but
he died?</q> <q>He is free.</q> <q>His intention was to smite an
adult, and there was not sufficient force in the blow to cause
death to an adult, and it passed off to a child, and there was
sufficient force to kill the child, and he died?</q> <q>He is free.</q>
<q>His intention was to smite a child, and there was sufficient
force in the blow to cause death to a child, and it passed to an
adult, and there was not sufficient force to cause death to the
adult, but he died?</q> <q>He is free.</q> <q>But his intention was
to smite him on his loins, and there was sufficient force in the
blow to cause death on his loins, and it passed to his heart, and
he died?</q> <q>He is guilty.</q> <q>His intention was to smite an
adult, and there was sufficient force in the blow to cause the
death of the adult, and it passed to a child, and he died?</q> <q>He
is guilty.</q> R. Simon said, <q>even if his intention be to kill this
one, and he killed that one, he is free.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. <q>A murderer, who is mingled with others?</q> <q>All are
to be freed.</q> R. Judah said, <q>they are to be collected in a
prison.</q> <q>Several condemned to (different) deaths are promiscuously
mingled?</q> <q>They are all to be adjudged the lightest
punishment.</q> <q>Those condemned to stoning with those
condemned to burning?</q> R. Simon said, <q>they are to be
condemned to stoning, because burning is more grievous,</q> but
the Sages say, <q>they are to be condemned to burning, because
stoning is more grievous.</q> To them replied R. Simon, <q>if
burning were not more grievous, it would not have been assigned
to the daughter of a priest who was immoral.</q> They
replied to him, <q>if stoning were not more grievous, it would
not have been assigned to the blasphemer, and the idolater.</q>
<q>Those condemned to beheading, mingled with those condemned
to strangling?</q> R. Simon said, <q>they are to be put
to death with the sword,</q> but the Sages say, <q>with strangling.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. <q>He who is found guilty of two deaths by the judges?</q>
<q>He is condemned to the more grievous punishment.</q> <q>He
committed a transgression, which made him deserve two
deaths?</q> <q>He is condemned to the more grievous.</q> R. José
said, <q>he is condemned for the first deed which he committed.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. <q>He who is flogged once and again?</q> <q>The judges commit
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
him to prison, and they give him barley to eat till his belly
bursts.</q> <q>He who killed a person without witnesses?</q> <q>They
commit him to prison, and they give him to eat the bread of adversity,
and the water of affliction.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. xxx. 20.</note>
</p>

<p>
6. <q>A thief who stole a sacred vessel, and he who cursed
in necromancy, and the paramour of an Aramæan?</q> <q>The
avengers may at once fall upon him.</q> <q>The priest who served
in legal uncleanness?</q> <q>His brother priests have no need to
bring him to the tribunal, but the young priests drag him outside
of the court, and dash out his brains with fagots of
wood.</q> <q>A stranger who served in the sanctuary?</q> R. Akiba
said, he is to be killed <q>with strangling,</q> but the Sages say,
<q>by the visitation of heaven.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter X</head>

<p>
1. All Israel have a portion in the world to come, as is said,
<q>Thy people also shall be all righteous,</q><note place='foot'>Isa.
lx. 21.</note> etc. And these are
they who have no portion in the world to come: he who says
there is no resurrection of the dead in the law, and that there is
no revealed law from heaven, and the Epicurean. R. Akiba
said, <q>even he who reads in forbidden<note place='foot'>Literally,
outside.</note> books, and he who
mutters over a wound</q>; and he said, <q>I will put none of
these diseases upon thee, which I have brought upon the Egyptians: for I
am the Lord that healeth thee.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xv. 26.</note> Aba Shaul
said, <q>even to meditate the NAME<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, to
meditate with the intention to mutter JEHOVAH over a wound.</note> in its letters.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. Three kings and four ordinary persons have no portion
in the world to come. Three kings, Jeroboam, Ahab, and
Manasseh. R. Judah said, <q>Manasseh had a portion in the
world to come,</q> as is said, <q>And prayed unto him, and he was
entreated of him, and heard his supplication, and brought him
again to Jerusalem into his kingdom.</q><note place='foot'>2 Chron.
xxxiii. 13.</note> The Sages said to
him, <q>He brought him back to his kingdom, but He did not
bring him back to life in the world to come.</q> Four ordinary
persons, Balaam, and Doeg, and Ahitophel, and Gehazi, have
no portion in the world to come.
</p>

<p>
3. The generation of the deluge has no portion in the world
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
to come, and they stand not in judgment, as is said, <q>My
Spirit shall not always strive with man.</q><note place='foot'>Gen. vi. 3.</note> (They
have) neither judgment nor spirit. The generation of the dispersion has
no portion in the world to come, as is said, <q>So the Lord
scattered them abroad from thence upon the face of all the
earth.</q><note place='foot'>Gen. xi. 8.</note> And the Lord scattered them in this
world, and from thence the Lord scattered them in the world to come.
The men of Sodom have no portion in the world to come, as
is said, <q>But the men of Sodom were wicked and sinners before
the Lord exceedingly,</q><note place='foot'>Gen. xiii. 13.</note> wicked in this world,
and sinners in the world to come. But they will stand in judgment.
R. Nehemiah said, <q>neither one nor other will stand in judgment,</q>
as is said, <q>Therefore the ungodly shall not stand in
the judgment, nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous.</q><note place='foot'>Ps.
i. 5.</note> <q>Therefore the wicked shall not stand in judgment;</q>
this is the generation of the deluge: <q>Nor sinners
in the congregation of the righteous;</q> these are the men of
Sodom. The (Sages) said to him, <q>they do not stand in the
congregation of the righteous, but they stand in the congregation
of the wicked.</q> The spies have no portion in the world
to come, as is said, <q>Even those men that did bring up the
evil report upon the land, died by the plague before the
Lord.</q><note place='foot'>Num. xiv. 37.</note> And they died in this world. They also
died in the plague in the world to come. <q>The generation of the
wilderness has no portion in the world to come, and they will
not stand in judgment, as is said, <q>In this wilderness they
shall be consumed, and there they shall die.</q></q><note place='foot'>Num. xiv.
35.</note> The words of R. Akiba. R. Eliezer said, <q>of them He said, <q>Gather my
saints together unto me, those that have made a covenant
with me by sacrifice.</q></q><note place='foot'>Ps. l. 5.</note> <q>The congregation of
Korah will not come up, as is said, <q>And the earth closed upon
them</q><note place='foot'>Num. xvi. 33.</note> in this world. <q>And they perished from
among the congregation</q> in the world to come.</q> The words of R. Akiba. R.
Eliezer said, <q>of them he said, <q>The Lord killeth and maketh
alive; he bringeth down to the grave and bringeth up.</q></q><note place='foot'>1 Sam.
ii. 6.</note> <q>The ten tribes will not return, as is said, <q>And cast them into
another land, as it is this day</q>;<note place='foot'>Deut. xxix. 28.</note> as the day
departs and does
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
not return, so they depart and do not return.</q> The words of
R. Akiba. R. Eliezer said, <q>as the day darkens and brightens,
so will it be with the ten tribes; as it was dark for them, so
will it be bright for them.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. The men of a city withdrawn to idolatry have no portion
in the world to come, as is said, <q>Certain men, the children
of Belial, are gone out from among you and have withdrawn
the inhabitants of their city,</q><note place='foot'>Deut. xiii. 13.</note> and they are
not to be killed till the withdrawers be from the city itself and from
the tribe itself, and till it withdraw the majority, and till the
withdrawers be men. If the withdrawers be women, or children,
or the minority be withdrawn, or the withdrawers be
outside it, they are to be treated singly, and they need two
witnesses, and a warning to each one of them. It is more
grievous for individuals than for the multitude, because individuals
must be stoned, though for that reason their money
is safe for their heirs; but the multitude are cut off with the
sword, and for that reason their money is lost.
</p>

<p>
5. <q>Thou shalt surely smite the inhabitants of that city,</q><note place='foot'>Deut.
xiii. 15.</note> etc. A caravan of asses or camels passing from place to place
are delivered, as is said, <q>Destroying it utterly and all that is
therein,</q> etc. From thence they said, <q>the property of the
righteous in it is lost, out of the city it is safe. But that of the
wicked, whether inside or outside, is lost.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. <q>And thou shalt gather all the spoil of it into the midst
of the street thereof.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. xiii. 16.</note> If it have no
street, they must make a street for it. If there be a street outside of it, they bring
it inside. <q>And shalt burn with fire the city and all the spoil
thereof,</q> its spoil but not the spoil of heaven. From thence
they say, the holy things therein are to be redeemed, and the
heave-offerings suffered to decay. The second tithes and
holy writings are to be concealed. <q>Every whit for the Lord
thy God.</q> Said R. Simon, <q>The Holy One, Blessed be He,
said, If you execute judgment on the withdrawn city, I count
it for you as though you brought a burnt-offering wholly before
me.</q> <q>And it shall be a heap forever; it shall not be
built again.</q> <q>Thou shalt not make of it even gardens or
parks.</q> The words of R. José, the Galilean. R. Akiba said,
<q>it shall not be builded again. It must not be built as it was
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>
before, but it may be made (into) gardens and parks.</q> <q>And
there shall cleave naught of the cursed thing to thine hand.</q><note place='foot'>Deut.
xiii. 17.</note> Whilst the wicked are in the world, wrath is in the world.
When the wicked are destroyed from the world, wrath retires
from the world.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XI</head>

<p>
1. These are to be strangled&mdash;he who beats his father or
his mother, and he who steals a soul from Israel, and an
<q>elder</q> who is rebellious against the judges, and a false
prophet, and he who prophesies in the name of idolatry, and
false witnesses proved to be perjured against a priest's daughter
and her paramour. He who beats father or mother is not
guilty till he make a bruise in them. It is more grievous to
curse them than to beat them. Because if he cursed them
after their death, he is guilty; but if he beat them after their
death, he is free. He who stole a soul from Israel is not guilty
till he bring him on his property. R. Judah said, <q>till he
bring him on his property and obtain service by him,</q> as is
said, <q>And maketh merchandise of him, or selleth him.</q><note place='foot'>Deut.
xxiv. 7.</note> <q>If he steal his own son?</q> R. Ishmael, the son of R.
Jochanan, the son of Beroka, pronounces him <q>guilty,</q> but
the sages pronounce him <q>free.</q> <q>If he stole one, half a
servant and half free?</q> R. Judah pronounces him <q>guilty,</q>
but the Sages pronounce him <q>free.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. The elder rebellious against the decision of the judges?
as it is said, <q>If there arise a matter too hard for thee in
judgment,</q><note place='foot'>Deut. xvii. 8.</note> etc. There were three places of
judgment. One place was by the door of the Mountain of the House; and
one was by the door of the court; and one was in the chamber
of hewn stone. The witnesses against the rebellious elder
came to the one by the door of the Mountain of the House,
and each one said, <q>so I expounded, and so my companions
expounded; so I taught, and so my companions taught.</q> If
the judges listened to them, they told them: but if not, they
went to those at the door of the court, and each one said,
<q>so I expounded, and so my companions expounded; so I
taught, and so my companions taught.</q> If they listened to
them, they told them; but if not, both parties went to the supreme
<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>
court in the chamber of hewn stone, because from it
the Law proceeded forth to all Israel, as is said, <q>Of that
place which the Lord shall choose.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. xvii. 10.</note> <q>If
the rebellious elder returned to his city, and taught as before?</q> <q>He is free.</q>
<q>But if he decided to practise false teaching?</q> <q>He is
guilty,</q> as is said, <q>And the man that will do
presumptuously.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. xvii. 12.</note> He is not guilty till he
decide to practise his false teaching. A disciple who decided to practise false teaching
is free. It follows that what is a grave offence in the one is a
light offence in the other.
</p>

<p>
3. The burden in the words of the scribes is greater than
the burden in the words of the law. He who said, <q>There are
no phylacteries, so as to transgress the words of the law?</q>
<q>He is free.</q> He who said, <q>There are five frontlets, so as
to add to the words of the scribes?</q> <q>He is guilty.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. <q>The judges do not put such an offender to death in
the tribunal of his city, nor in the tribunal of Jabneh,<note place='foot'>Now called
Yebna.</note> but they bring him up to the supreme court in Jerusalem, and
they guard him till a holiday; and they put him to death on
a holiday, as is said, <q>And all the people shall hear and fear,
and do no more presumptuously.</q></q><note place='foot'>Deut. xvii. 13.</note> The
words of R. Akiba. R. Judah said, <q>they do not cause him anguish in delaying his
judgment, but they execute him off-hand.</q> And they write
and send messengers to all places, <q>Such a man, the son of
such a man, is condemned to death by the tribunal.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. A false prophet, who prophesied what he did not hear,
and what was not told to him, is put to death by the hands of
man. But he who suppressed his prophecy, and he who added
to the words of a prophet, and a prophet who transgressed his
own words, is put to death by the visitation of heaven, as is
said, <q>I will require it of him.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. xviii. 19.</note>
</p>

<p>
6. And he who prophesied in the name of idolatry and
said, <q>so the idol said,</q> even though its decision was exactly
to pronounce unclean the unclean, and to pronounce cleansed
the clean, is to be strangled. And so also the false witnesses
against a priest's daughter. Because all false witnesses are
condemned to the same death which they had intended (for
the accused), except false witnesses against the daughter of a
priest, and they are to be strangled.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>On Idolatry<note place='foot'>Literally, strange worship. It chiefly means the
worship of the stars and other heavenly bodies.</note></head>

<quote rend='display'>
Dealings with Idolaters&mdash;Idolatrous Feasts&mdash;Things Not to be Sold to
Idolaters&mdash;Labor with Idolaters&mdash;The Letting Out of Houses and
Fields&mdash;Precautions&mdash;Things Forbidden and Things Allowed&mdash;Idols
and Fragments of Idols&mdash;Hills and Groves&mdash;Houses Joined to an
Idol Temple&mdash;Idolatrous Trees&mdash;Image of Mercury&mdash;Annulling
Idolatry&mdash;Pagan Argument for
Idolatry&mdash;Answer&mdash;Treading&mdash;Pressing&mdash;Baking&mdash;Wine
of Libation&mdash;Culinary Utensils.
</quote>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I</head>

<p>
1. Three days before the feasts of the idolaters it is forbidden
to deal with them, to lend articles to them, or to take
a loan of articles from them; to make a loan of money to them,
or to borrow money from them; to repay them, or to take payment
from them. Rabbi Judah said, <q>it is allowed to take
payment from them, since it is unsatisfactory to the idolater.</q>
The (Sages) answered him, <q>though it is unpleasant to him
now, he rejoices afterward.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. R. Ishmael said, <q>three days before and three days after
their feasts it is forbidden.</q> But the Sages say, <q>before their
feasts it is forbidden, after their feasts it is allowed.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. <q>And these are the feasts of the idolaters&mdash;the Kalends,
and the Saturnalia, and the Quartesima, and the coronation
day of their kings, and the day of their birth, and the day of
their death.</q> The words of R. Meier. But the Sages say,
<q>every death anniversary in which there is burning of incense,<note place='foot'>Jer.
xxxiv. 5.</note> there is in it the worship of idols. But if there be no
burning of incense there is no worship of idols.</q> <q>The day
of shaving his beard and cutting his hair, the day of his disembarking
from the sea, and the day of his release from prison,
and the day when the heathen makes a feast for his son?</q>
<q>It is not forbidden to deal with them save on this day of his
feast, and with this man who keeps the feast only.</q>
</p>

<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>

<p>
4. <q>The city in which there exists idolatry outside the
city?</q> <q>It is allowed to deal with the idolaters.</q> <q>If the
idolatry be outside?</q> <q>Inside it is allowed.</q> <q>How is it
with going there?</q> <q>When the road directly leads to the
place itself, it is forbidden; but if it be possible to go by it to
another place, it is allowed.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. <q>If in the city in which there exists idolatry there be
shops, some decorated with idolatrous crowns, and some without
decoration?</q> This was the case in Bethshan; and the
Sages say, <q>the decorated ones are forbidden for dealing, and
those not decorated are allowed.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. These things are forbidden to be sold to idolaters&mdash;fir-cones,
and the best figs, with their clusters, and incense, and
the white cock. R. Judah said, <q>it is allowable to sell a white
cock among many others. But when a man has only one, he
must cut its claw before he sell it, since the heathen do not
offer that which is blemished in idol worship.</q> And all other
things for ordinary uses are allowed&mdash;but if they be declared
to be for idolatry, they are forbidden. R. Meier said, <q>even
the fine dates, and the date sap,<note place='foot'>Or sugar-cane.</note> and the
Jericho dates, are forbidden for sale to idolaters.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. Where they are accustomed to sell small cattle to
idolaters, they may sell them. Where they are unaccustomed
to sell them, they must not sell them. And everywhere they
must not sell to them the large cattle, calves, ass foals, unblemished
or blemished. R. Judah allowed the broken-boned;
and Benbethira allowed even horses.
</p>

<p>
8. Men must not sell to them bears or lions, or anything
in which there is peril to the multitude. They must not build
with them royal halls,<note place='foot'>For executions.</note> judgment-seats, and
stadiums,<note place='foot'>For races.</note> and bemas.<note place='foot'>Where
harangues were delivered involving life and death.</note> But men may build with them
altars and baths. When they reach to the arching in which they place their idol,
it is forbidden to build farther.
</p>

<p>
9. And Israelites must not make decorations for idols, necklaces,
and nose-rings, and rings. R. Eleazar said, <q>for pay it
is allowed.</q> Men must not sell to them what is fastened to
the ground. But one may sell it after it is cut down. R. Judah
<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>
said, <q>one may sell it to a heathen on condition that he cuts
it down.</q>
</p>

<p>
10. <q>Men must not let to them buildings<note place='foot'>Nor graves.</note> in the
Land of Israel, and it is needless to say fields. But in Syria they may
let to them buildings, but not fields. But out of the Land
they may sell to them buildings, and may rent to them fields.</q>
The words of R. Meier. R. José said, <q>in the Land of Israel
men may let to them buildings, but not fields. But in Syria
they may sell buildings and rent fields to them, and out of the
Land they may sell both.</q> However, where they said to let,
they did not say a dwelling-house; since a heathen can bring
inside of it an idol, as it is said, <q>Thou shalt not bring in
abomination into thy house.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. vii. 26.</note> And everywhere a
man must not hire to a heathen his bath, because it is called by his
name.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II</head>

<p>
1. Israelites must not put cattle in the stables of idolaters,
because of their evil habits. And a woman must not be alone
with them, because of their evil habits. And no man should
be alone with them, because they are apt to shed blood.
</p>

<p>
2. A daughter of Israel must not attend an idolatrous
woman, because she helps the birth of a child for idolatry.
But an idolatress may attend a daughter of Israel. A daughter
of Israel must not suckle a child of an idolatress; but an
idolatress may suckle a child of a daughter of Israel, under her
observation.
</p>

<p>
3. <q>Israelites may take from them medicine to cure property;
but not to cure persons. And they are not to be shaved
by them anywhere.</q> The words of R. Meier. But the Sages
say, <q>under public observation it is allowed, but not entirely
alone.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. These things of the idolaters are forbidden, and every
use of them is strictly forbidden; wine, and vinegar of the
heathen which was at first wine, and Hadrian's mixture<note place='foot'>Hadrian's
mixture was balls of clay saturated with wine and taken on military
expeditions. When the soldiers wished to drink, they soaked them in
water so that it had a taste of wine, and the mud settled at the bottom of the
vessel.</note> with its fragments, and hides of animals with their
hearts<note place='foot'>The heart torn out of the animal when alive to be offered in
idolatrous worship.</note> (torn
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
out). Rabbi Simon, the son of Gamaliel, said, <q>when the
rent is round, it is forbidden, when lengthwise, it is allowed.</q>
<q>The flesh brought in for idolatry is allowed; but that which
is brought out is forbidden, because it is the sacrifice for the
dead.</q> The words of R. Akiba. It is forbidden to do business
with those who go to worship the Penates; but with
those who return from them it is allowed. <q>The skin-bottles
of the idolaters and their jugs into which Jewish wine is
poured, are forbidden, and every use of them is strictly forbidden.</q>
The words of R. Meier. But the Sages say, <q>every
use of them is not forbidden.</q> <q>Grape-stones and grape-skins
of the idolaters are forbidden, and every use of them
is strictly forbidden.</q> The words of R. Meier. But the Sages
say, <q>when moist, they are forbidden; but when dry, they
are allowed.</q> <q>Fish-brine and the cheese from Bethuniki,<note place='foot'>A
village where calves were offered in idolatry. Consequently the rennet
was forbidden, and the cheese made from their rennet was also forbidden.</note>
a village of the idolaters, are forbidden, and every use of them
strictly forbidden.</q> The words of R. Meier. But the Sages
say, <q>every use of them is not forbidden.</q> R. Judah related,
that R. Ishmael asked R. Joshua, as they were journeying
along the road&mdash;he said to him, <q>why do they forbid the
cheese of idolaters?</q> He replied to him, <q>because they cause
it to ferment with the stomach of a carcass.</q> R. Ishmael said
to him, <q>and is not the stomach of a burnt-offering of more
importance than the stomach of a carcass,</q> and it was said,
<q>the priest who was so minded supped the milk that was in
it,</q> but the Sages did not agree with him, and they said, <q>the
priests do not use it, and they are not guilty.</q> He changed
the conversation, and said to him, <q>because they ferment it
with the stomach of a calf (devoted) to idolatry.</q> He said
to him, <q>if so, why do they not forbid it for every use?</q> He
turned to another subject, and said to him, <q>brother Ishmael,
how do you read, <q>For thy love is better than wine,</q><note place='foot'>Sol. Song,
i. 2. The question is, whether the friendship sprang from the
wine or not, and his conclusion is that as the savor is connected with the oil,
so is the friendship with the wine, and so is the cheese connected with idolatry.</note>
or <q>For thy love is good</q>?</q> He replied to him, <q>For thy love is
good.</q> He said to him, <q>it is not so, since the next verse explains
it, <q>Because of the savor of thy good ointments.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
5. These things of the idolaters are forbidden, but every
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>
use of them is not strictly forbidden; milk which a heathen
milked, and an Israelite did not see it. <q>Their bread and
oil?</q> <q>Rabbi and his colleagues allowed oil.</q> But the
cookery, and the gravy into which they are wont to put wine
and vinegar, and shred thunny fish, and the sauce in which
the fish chalbith is not swimming, and the herring, and the
essence of assafœtida, and spiced salt, are forbidden; but every
use of them is not strictly forbidden.
</p>

<p>
6. These things are allowed for eating&mdash;milk which an
idolater milked, and an Israelite saw, and honey and honeycomb,
even if they are dropping, as they do not contain the
effect of liquor,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, for legal
defilement.</note> and gravy into which they are not wont to put
wine and vinegar, and shred thunny fish, and sauce in which
there is the fish chalbith, and the leaf of the assafœtida, and
olives crushed into round cakes. R. José said, <q>the kernels
detached from the olives are forbidden.</q> The locusts which
they bring from their baskets<note place='foot'>The locusts might be mixed in the
basket with wine or liquor, which would cause legal defilement.</note> are forbidden;
but those brought from their magazines are allowed. And even so is
the decision for their heave-offerings.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III</head>

<p>
1. <q>All images are forbidden, because they are worshipped
once a year.</q> The words of R. Meier. But the Sages say,
<q>only those are forbidden which have in their hand a staff, or
bird, or ball.</q> R. Simon, the son of Gamaliel, said, <q>all images
which have in their hand anything whatever.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. <q>If one find the broken pieces of images?</q> <q>They are
allowed (for useful purposes).</q> <q>If one find the figure of a
hand, or the figure of a foot?</q> <q>They are forbidden, because
such as they are worshipped.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. <q>(If one find) vessels on which is the form of the sun-disk,
the form of the moon, the form of a dragon?</q> <q>They
are to be carried into the Salt Sea.</q><note place='foot'>The Salt Sea generally means
in the Talmud the Dead Sea. It is now called by the Arabs <q>Bahr-Lût,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the Sea of Lot.</note> R. Simon, the son of
Gamaliel, said, <q>when such forms are on precious (vessels)
they are forbidden, when they are on insignificant (ones) they
are allowed.</q>
</p>

<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>

<p>
4. R. José said, <q>one must grind the image to powder and
scatter it to the wind, or cast it into the sea.</q> The Sages said
to him, <q>then it will make dung,</q> and it is said, <q>And there
shall not cleave to thy hand aught of the accursed thing.</q><note place='foot'>Deut.
xiii. 17.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. Proclus, the son of a philosopher, asked R. Gamaliel,
in Acho,<note place='foot'>The modern Akka (Acre).</note> as he was bathing in the bath
of Venus, and said to him, <q>it is written in thy law, <q>and there shall not cleave
to thy hand aught of the accursed thing</q>; why dost thou bathe
in the bath of Venus?</q> He said to him, <q>men do not give
replies in the bath</q>; and when he came out he said to him,
<q>I came not within its district; it came into my district.</q>
They did not say, <q>let us make a bath to the honor of Venus,
but they said, let us make Venus an honor to the bath.</q> Another
thing: <q>if they gave thee money wouldst thou enter
naked before thy idol, or wouldst thou do aught disgraceful in
its presence? yet if it stands on a canal everyone dishonors
it.</q> It is not said, save for their heathen gods, <q>that which
is customary from its being a god, is forbidden, that which
is not customary from its being a god, is allowed.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. Though idolaters worship the mountains and the hills,
the mountains and the hills are allowed, but what is upon
them is forbidden; as is said, <q>Thou shalt not covet the silver
and the gold upon them to take them.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. vii. 25.</note> R.
José, the Galilean, said, <q>their gods of the mountains, but not the
mountains their gods; their gods of the hills, but not the hills
their gods.</q> <q>But why are the groves forbidden?</q> <q>Because
they are prepared by man's hands, and every object of
idolatry which is prepared by man's hands is forbidden.</q> Said
R. Akiba, <q>I will consider and decide before thee; every place
in which you find a high mountain, and an elevated hill, and
a flourishing tree, know that there is idolatry.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. <q>He who had a house joined to an idol, and it fell
down?</q> <q>It is forbidden to rebuild it.</q> <q>What shall he
do?</q> <q>He must first reduce the size of the house by four
cubits, and then rebuild it.</q> <q>If the house be in common
between him and the idol?</q> <q>It is decided to leave the four
cubits unoccupied, as its stones, wood, and dust cause defilement
like a worm, <q>Thou shalt utterly detest it.</q></q><note place='foot'>Deut. vii.
26.</note>
</p>

<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>

<p>
8. There are three sorts of buildings. The house originally
built for idolatry is forbidden. <q>If the idolater whitewashed,
and painted, and repaired it for the idol?</q> <q>He must take
down his repairs.</q> <q>If he brought in and afterward took out
the idol?</q> <q>It is allowed.</q>
</p>

<p>
9. There are three sorts of stones. The stone originally
hewn for a pedestal to the idol is forbidden. <q>If the idolater
whitewashed, and painted, and repaired it to honor an idol?</q>
<q>He must take down his repairs.</q> <q>If he placed his idol upon
it, and afterward took it away?</q> <q>It is allowed.</q>
</p>

<p>
10. There are three sorts of groves. The tree originally
planted to honor an idol is forbidden. <q>If the idolater cut
it, and hewed it, and made changes to honor an idol?</q> <q>He
must take down his changes.</q> <q>If he placed an idol beneath
it and abused it?</q> <q>It is allowed.</q>
</p>

<p>
11. <q>What is a grove?</q> <q>That in which there is an idol.</q>
R. Simon said, <q>everything that is worshipped, as it happened
in Zidon at the tree where they worshipped, and they
found beneath it a heap. Said R. Simon to them, <q>examine
this heap.</q> And they examined it and found in it an image.
He said to them, <q>as the object of service is the image, we shall
allow the tree to you.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
12. One must not sit in the shadow of an idolatrous grove,
and though he sit, he is legally clean. And one must not pass
underneath it; even if one pass he is defiled. <q>If it occupy the
public thoroughfare and one pass beneath it?</q> <q>He is clean.</q>
</p>

<p>
13. One may sow underneath it vegetables in winter, but
not in summer. But lettuce<note place='foot'>Lest the lettuce might derive profit from
the shade of the idolatrous grove.</note> must not be sown either in summer
or winter. R. José said, <q>not even vegetables in winter,
since the leaves would fall upon them and serve them for
dung.</q>
</p>

<p>
14. <q>Has one taken wood from it?</q> <q>Its wood is forbidden
for every use.</q> <q>Has one heated an oven with it?</q>
<q>If the oven be new it must be broken down, and if old it
must be cooled down.</q> <q>Has one baked bread in it?</q> <q>The
use of the bread is forbidden.</q> <q>Are the loaves mixed with
other loaves, and these again with others?</q> <q>The use of all
the loaves is forbidden.</q> R. Eliezer said, <q>its value is to be
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>
cast into the Salt Sea.</q> The Sages replied to him, <q>there is
no redemption for idolatry.</q> <q>Has one made out of such a
tree a weaver's shuttle?</q> <q>Its use is forbidden.</q> <q>Has one
woven a garment with it?</q> <q>The use of the garment is forbidden.</q>
<q>Is the garment mixed with other garments, and
these again with others?</q> <q>The use of all the garments is
forbidden.</q> Rabbi Eleazar said, <q>its value is to be cast into
the Salt Sea.</q> The Sages replied to him, <q>there is no redemption
for idolatry.</q>
</p>

<p>
15. <q>How is the tree to be desecrated?</q> <q>Has the idolater
broken off dry bark, or green boughs; has he taken from it a
staff, or a twig, or even a leaf&mdash;it is desecrated.</q> <q>Has he
trimmed it for the sake of the tree?</q> <q>It is forbidden.</q> <q>Has
he trimmed it, but not for the sake of the tree?</q> <q>It is allowed.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV</head>

<p>
1. Rabbi Ishmael said, <q>three stones<note place='foot'>These stones must be arranged
as two on the ground, and one over them, and not more than four ells distant
from the image, to fulfil the conditions of being an idolatrous offering. If the
stones did not fulfil these conditions, an Israelite might use them for building
purposes.</note> beside each other at
the side of the image of Mercury are forbidden, but two are
allowed.</q> But the Sages say, <q>when they are within his view
they are forbidden, but when they are not within his view they
are allowed.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. <q>Has one found money on his head, a garment, or implements
which are not offerings?</q> <q>They are allowed.</q>
Festoons of grapes, wreaths of ears of corn, and wines, and
oils, and fine flour, and everything similar offered on his altar
are forbidden.
</p>

<p>
3. A garden or a bath for idolatry is permitted for use
when it is gratuitous. But neither is to be used if a present
for the worship of the idol be expected. If it be in partnership
with others that are not so employed, either can be
used, whether it be with the expectation of a present or
gratuitous. The idol of idolaters is at once forbidden, but the
idol of Israel is not forbidden until it be served.
</p>

<p>
4. An idolater may desecrate his own idol, or the idol of
his companion. But Israel must not desecrate the idol of an
idolater. In desecrating the idol he desecrates what appertains
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
to it. <q>Has he desecrated what appertains to it?</q>
<q>What appertains to it is allowed, but the idol itself is forbidden.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. <q>How is it to be desecrated?</q> <q>He cuts off the lobe of
its ear, the tip of its nose, the end of its finger&mdash;he deforms
even though he does not diminish it&mdash;it is desecrated.</q> <q>He
spits before it, he drags it, and throws dirt upon it?</q> <q>It is
not desecrated.</q> <q>Has he sold it or pledged it?</q> Rabbi says,
<q>it is desecrated.</q> But the Sages say, <q>it is not desecrated.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. The idol, the service of which is abandoned in the time
of peace, is allowed. <q>But if its service be abandoned in time
of war?</q> <q>It is forbidden.</q><note place='foot'>If the idol be disregarded in time
of peace, the heathen have ceased to esteem it as a god, and Israelites might
use it for some purpose. But if the heathen neglected it during the confusion
of war, there was no proof that they would not worship it at another
time.</note> The royal pedestals<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>,
triumphal arches with statues upon them.</note> are forbidden,
because they are erected at the time when kings are
travelling.
</p>

<p>
7. The elders were asked in Rome, <q>If God has no pleasure
in idolatry, why does He not destroy it?</q> They replied
to the Romans, <q>If the idolaters were serving a thing which
was not necessary to the world, He would destroy it, but they
serve the sun-disk, and the moon, and the stars, and the signs
of the zodiac. Shall he destroy his world on account of the
fools?</q> They replied to them, <q>If so He can destroy the
object which is not wanted for the world, and leave that which
the world wants.</q> They replied to them, <q>even we should be
strengthening the hands of the worshippers of such objects;
they would say, there is a proof that they are gods, because
they are not destroyed.</q>
</p>

<p>
8. One may buy a wine-press pressed by an idolater, even
though he take <emph>grapes</emph> with his hand and lay them on the
heap of grapes, as it is not made the wine of idolatrous libation
till it runs into the vat. <q>Has it run into the vat?</q>
<q>That which is in the vat is forbidden, but the remainder is
allowed.</q> One may tread with an idolater in the wine-press,
but one must not gather grapes with him. One must not tread
or gather grapes with an Israelite who works in a state of defilement.
But one may carry with him empty barrels to the
press and bring them away with him from the press. One
<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
must not knead nor prepare with the baker who works in (a
state of) legal defilement, but one may carry the bread with
him to the dealer in bread.
</p>

<p>
9. <q>If an idolater be found standing by the side of a wine
vat, and if he have any loan upon it?</q> <q>It is forbidden.</q>
<q>If he have no loan on it?</q> <q>It is allowed.</q> <q>Has he fallen
into the vat and come out again, or measured it with a cane;
has he driven away a hornet with a cane; or has he given a
slap to the fermentation on the top of the barrel?</q> All these
things once happened, and the (Sages) decided, <q>Let it be
sold.</q> But R. Simon <q>allowed it.</q> He took the barrel and
flung it in a rage into the vat. This once happened, and the
Sages allowed it.
</p>

<p>
10. <q>Has one made the wine of an idolater without legal
defilement, and left it in his possession in a house open to
public concourse&mdash;in a city in which there are idolaters and
Israelites?</q> <q>It is allowed.</q> <q>In a city in which all are
idolaters?</q> <q>It is forbidden till he leave a watchman, and
it is not needful that the watchman sit and watch. Even
though he goes in and out it is allowed.</q> R. Simon, the son
of Eleazar, said, <q>all possession of wine by idolaters is alike.</q>
<q>Has one made the wine of a heathen without legal defilement,
and left it in his possession, and the idolater afterward
wrote to him, I have received from you the money for the
wine?</q> <q>It is allowed.</q> <q>But if the Israelite wish to withdraw
it, and the idolater do not permit him, till he shall give
him his money for it?</q> This once happened in Bethshan,
and the Sages <q>forbade it.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V</head>

<p>
1. <q>Has an idolater hired an Israelite to make with him
wine of idolatrous libation?</q> <q>His wages are forbidden.</q>
<q>But if he hired him to do with him another work, even
though he say to him, <q>carry for me a barrel of wine of libation
from place to place?</q></q> <q>His wages are allowed.</q> <q>Has
one hired an ass to bring on him wine of idolatrous libation?</q>
<q>The hire is not allowed.</q> <q>Has one hired out the ass for
riding, even though the idolater put his wine flask upon him?</q>
<q>The hire is allowed.</q>
</p>

<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>

<p>
2. Wine of idolatrous libation which fell on grapes must
be cleansed away, and they are allowed. But if the grapes
be crushed, they are forbidden. <q>Has the idolatrous wine
fallen on figs or on dates?</q> <q>If it convey to them a taste,
they are forbidden.</q> It happened once with Baithus, son of
Zonan, that he brought dried figs in a boat, and a barrel of
wine of idolatrous libation was broken, and it fell upon them,
and he consulted the Sages and they allowed them. This is
the rule: In every use where the taste is conveyed, it is forbidden.
But where in its use no taste is conveyed, it is allowed.
It is like vinegar which has fallen on peas.
</p>

<p>
3. <q>An idolater who was carrying with an Israelite pitchers
of wine from place to place?</q> <q>If it be certain that the
idolater is watched, it is allowed.</q> <q>If the Israelite let him
know that he is departing&mdash;if there be time to bore, to close,
and to seal the pitcher?</q> R. Simon, son of Gamaliel, said,
<q>it is not allowed if there be time to open, to cork, and to
seal it again.</q> <q>And an Israelite put his wine into a carriage,
or into a boat, and he has gone a near cut&mdash;he entered the
city and washed?</q> <q>It is allowed.</q> <q>But if he let the idolater
know that he is departing, if there be time to bore, and cork,
and seal it again?</q> R. Simon, son of Gamaliel, said, <q>it is
not allowed if there be time to open the barrel and cork and
seal it again.</q> <q>If he leave the idolater in the wine-shop,
even though he go in and out?</q> <q>It is allowed.</q> <q>But if
he let the idolater know that he departs, if there be time to
bore, and cork, and seal it again?</q> R. Simon ben Gamaliel
said, <q>it is not allowed if there be time to open, and to cork,
and to seal it again.</q> <q>Did he dine with the idolater at table,
and he left a flask on the table, and a flask on the sideboard,
and he left them and went out?</q> <q>That one which is on the
table is forbidden, but that one on the sideboard is allowed.</q>
<q>But if he said to him, <q>you may mix and drink wine, even
that one on the sideboard is forbidden?</q></q><note place='foot'>Because the idolater
might have made an idolatrous libation from both flasks.</note> <q>Open barrels are
forbidden, also sealed ones, when there is time to open, and
cork, and seal them up again.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. If foreign banditti have entered into a city in time of
peace, open barrels are forbidden&mdash;closed ones are allowed.
<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>
If the banditti have entered in time of war, both are equally
allowed, because there is no time for idolatrous libation.
</p>

<p>
5. When an idolater has sent to workmen of Israel a barrel
of wine of idolatrous libation for wages, it is allowed to say,
<q>give us its value.</q> <q>But if it has come into their possession?</q>
<q>It is forbidden.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. <q>Has one sold wine to an idolater?</q> <q>If he agreed
for the price before it is measured, its payment is allowed.</q>
<q>Has he measured it before he agreed for the price?</q> <q>Its
payment is forbidden.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. <q>Has one taken a funnel and measured wine into the
bottle of an idolater, and he then turned round and measured
wine into the bottle of an Israelite?</q> <q>If the funnel retain
a drop of the wine of the idolater, the wine is forbidden.</q>
<q>Has one poured the wine from vessel to vessel?</q> <q>That
vessel from which he poured it is allowed, and that one into
which he poured it is forbidden.</q>
</p>

<p>
8. Wine of idolatrous libation is forbidden, and even a little
of it renders forbidden&mdash;wine in wine, and water in water&mdash;how
much soever they be, and wine in water, and water in
wine, in giving a taste. This is the rule: If both be of one
sort, however little; if they be of different sorts, in giving a
taste.
</p>

<p>
9. These things are forbidden, and even a little of them
renders other things forbidden. Wine of idolatrous libation,
and idols, and skins of beasts with the hearts torn out, and an
ox that was stoned,<note place='foot'>Exod. xxi. 29.</note> and a heifer that is
beheaded,<note place='foot'>Deut. xxi. 4.</note> and the
birds from the leprosy, and the hair of the Nazarite,<note place='foot'>Num. vi.
18.</note> and the first-born of the ass, and flesh in milk, and the scapegoat, and
the profane animals<note place='foot'>This refers to the killing or slaughtering
of cattle and fowls for profane or domestic purposes. They were called
profane to distinguish them from the holy sacrifices.</note> which were slaughtered in
the Temple court. These are forbidden to be mixed with other things;
and if so mixed, even a little of them renders other things forbidden.
</p>

<p>
10. <q>Wine of idolatrous libation which has fallen into a
vat?</q> <q>All its use is forbidden.</q> R. Simon ben Gamaliel
said, <q>it may all be sold to heathens, excepting the value of
the wine of idolatrous libation which is in it.</q>
</p>

<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>

<p>
11. <q>A stone-press which an idolater has prepared with
pitch?</q> <q>It must be cleansed, and it is clean.</q> <q>And if of
wood?</q> Rabbi said, <q>it should be cleansed</q>; and the Sages
said, <q>one must peel off the pitch; but if it be made of earthenware,
even though one peel off the pitch, it is forbidden.</q>
</p>

<p>
12. <q>If one buy culinary utensils from an idolater?</q> <q>That
which it is usual to dip (in water), one must dip; to scour,
one must scour; to whiten in the fire, one must whiten in fire.
The spit and the fork, one must whiten in the fire;<note place='foot'>Num. xxxi.
23.</note> and the knife must be rubbed down, and it is clean.</q>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Fathers</head>

<quote rend='display'>
The Oral Law&mdash;Its Transmission&mdash;Names of the
<q>Receivers</q>&mdash;Maxims&mdash;Apothegms&mdash;Wisdom
of the Wise.
</quote>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I</head>

<p>
1. Moses received the Oral Law from Sinai and delivered
it to Joshua, and Joshua delivered it to the elders, and the
elders to the prophets, and the prophets to the men of the
great synagogue.<note place='foot'>The men of the great synagogue
were the <q>Scribes</q> who flourished from the return out of Babylon till the
Græco-Syrian persecution, 220 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> Their object
was to preserve the sacred text with scrupulous minuteness, and make
a <q>fence</q> for the law. They added numberless directions for the better observance
of the old precepts. The Scribes were succeeded by the <q>learners,</q>
the <q>repeaters,</q> and the <q>master builders,</q> who continued from 220
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> till 220 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> In their time
fall the Maccabæan revolution, the birth of Christ, the overthrow of the Temple by
Titus, the rebellion of Barchochba, the complete destruction of Jerusalem, and
the dispersion of the Jews.</note> They said three things, <q>be deliberate in
judgment, raise up many disciples, and make a fence for the
law.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. Simon the Just was one of the last of the men of the
great synagogue. He used to say that the world stood on
three things&mdash;<q>on the law, the service, and the acts of the
pious.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. Antigonus of Soco received (the law) from Simon the
Just. He used to say, <q>be not as servants, who serve their
master for the sake of receiving a reward, but be like servants
who serve their master without the view of receiving a reward;
and let the fear of heaven be upon you.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. José, son of Joezer of Zeredah, and José, son of Jochanan
of Jerusalem, received (the oral law) from him. José, son of
Joezer of Zeredah, said, <q>let thy house be a house of assembly
for the wise, and dust thyself with the dust of their feet, and
drink their words in thirstiness.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. José, son of Jochanan of Jerusalem, said, <q>let thy house
be wide open, and let the poor be thy children. Discourse
not much with women, not even with thy wife, much less with
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
thy neighbor's wife.</q> Hence the wise men say, <q>whoever
converses much with women brings evil on himself, neglects
the study of the law, and at last will inherit hell.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. Joshua, son of Perechiah, and Natai the Arbelite received
the oral law from them. Joshua, son of Perechiah, said,
<q>get thyself a master, and obtain a companion, and judge all
mankind with favor.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. Natai the Arbelite said, <q>withdraw from an evil neighbor,
and associate not with the wicked, neither flatter thyself
to escape punishment.</q>
</p>

<p>
8. Judah, son of Tabai, and Simon, son of Shetach, received
it of them. Judah, son of Tabai, said, <q>consider not thyself
as the arranger of the law, and when the parties are before
thee in judgment, consider them as guilty; but when they are
departed from thee, consider them as innocent, when they
have acquiesced in the sentence.</q>
</p>

<p>
9. Simon, son of Shetach, said, <q>be extremely careful in
the examination of witnesses, and be cautious in thy words,
lest they from thence should learn to utter a falsehood.</q>
</p>

<p>
10. Shemaiah and Abtalyon<note place='foot'>Supposed by some to be the Sameas
and Pollio of Josephus. Though others try to identify Sameas with Simon, son
of Shetach.&mdash;<q>Antiq.</q> xiv. ix. 4, etc.</note> received it from them. Shemaiah
said, <q>love thy business and hate dominion, and be
unknown to government.</q>
</p>

<p>
11. Abtalyon said, <q>ye Sages, be cautious of your words,
lest ye be doomed to captivity, and carried captive to a place
of bad waters, and the disciples who follow you should drink
of them, by which means the name of God may be profaned.</q>
</p>

<p>
12. Hillel and Shammai received it of them. Hillel said,
<q>be thou of the disciples of Aaron, who loved peace, and pursued
peace, so that thou love mankind, and allure them to the
study of the law.</q>
</p>

<p>
13. He used to say, <q>whoever aggrandizes his name, destroys
his name, and he who does not increase his knowledge
in the law, shall be cut off, and he who does not study the law,
is deserving of death, and he who serves himself with the
crown of the law, will perish.</q>
</p>

<p>
14. He also said, <q>if I perform not good works myself, who
can do them for me?</q> and <q>when I consider myself, what am
I?</q> and <q>if not now, when shall I?</q>
</p>

<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>

<p>
15. Shammai said, <q>let thy study of the law be fixed, say little
and do much, and receive all men with an open, pleasant
face.</q>
</p>

<p>
16. Rabban Gamaliel said, <q>procure thyself an instructor,
that thou mayest not be in doubt, and accustom not thyself to
give tithes by conjecture.</q>
</p>

<p>
17. Simon, his son, said, <q>I have all my life been brought
up among wise men, and never found anything so good for the
body as silence, neither is the study of the law the principal
thing, but its practice,</q> and <q>whoever multiplies words causes
sin.</q>
</p>

<p>
18. Rabban Simon, son of Gamaliel, said the duration of
the world depends on three things, justice, truth, and peace,
as is said, <q>judge truth, and justice, and peace in your gates.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II</head>

<p>
1. Rabbi Judah said, <q>which are the most eligible paths
for man to choose? All such as are an ornament to those who
tread therein; and get them honor from man. Be also as careful
of the observance of a light precept, as of a weighty one;
because thou knowest not the due reward of the precepts, and
balance the loss sustained by the omission of a precept against
its recompense, and the reward of sin against its loss of happiness.
Consider also three things, and thou wilt not transgress.
Understand what is above thee: an All-seeing Eye
and a Hearing Ear; and that all thy actions are written in a
Book.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. Rabban Gamaliel, the son of Rabban Judah the Prince,
said, <q>that the study of the law and intercourse with the world
are commendable together, as the joining of these two annihilates
sin; and all the study of the law, that is not supported
by business, will become of none effect, and will be the cause
of sin; and whoever is engaged in the service of the congregation,
ought to act for God's sake, then will the merit of their
ancestors support them, and their charitable deeds exist to
eternity; and I (God) shall account you deserving of a great
recompense, as if ye had actually done it.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. <q>Be ye warned of following princes, as they only bestow
favors on men for their own interest. They show themselves
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
as friends while men are useful to them; but they will not support
a man in time of need.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. He used to say, <q>do His will as if it were thine own
will, that He may accomplish thy will as if it were His will;
abolish thy will for the sake of His will, that He may abolish
the will of others for the sake of thy will.</q> Hillel said, <q>separate
not thyself from the congregation, nor have confidence
in thyself, until the day of thy death. Judge not thy neighbor
till thou art in his situation, neither utter a sentence as
if it were incomprehensible, that afterward may be comprehended,
nor say, when I shall have leisure I shall study;
mayhap thou wilt not have leisure.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. He also said, <q>a boor cannot be fearful of sin, nor can a
rustic be a saint; the bashful will not become learned, nor the
passionate man a teacher; neither will he, who is much engaged
in traffic, become wise; and where there are no men,
strive thou to be a man.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. He having also seen a skull floating on the water, said,
<q>because thou didst make others float, have they floated thee!
and the end of those who made thee float will be that they will
float.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. He also said, <q>he who increases flesh, increases worms;
he who increases riches, increases care; he who increases
wives, increases witchcraft; he who increases female servants,
increases lewdness; he who increases men servants, increases
robbery; but he who increases his knowledge of the law, increases
life; he who increases his study in college, increases
wisdom; he who increases counsel, increases prudence; he
who increases justice, increases peace; if a man have gained
a good name, he has gained it for himself; if he have gained
the words of the law, he has gained for himself everlasting life
in the world to come.</q>
</p>

<p>
8. Rabbi Jochanan, son of Zaccai, received the oral law
from Hillel and Shammai. He used to say, <q>if thou hast
spent much time in the study of the law, yet pride not thyself
thereon, because for that wast thou created.</q> Rabbi Jochanan,
son of Zaccai, had five disciples, and these are they: Rabbi
Eleazar, son of Hyrcanus, Rabbi Joshua, son of Chananya,
Rabbi José the priest, Rabbi Simon, son of Nathanael, Rabbi
Eleazar, son of Arach. He used thus to estimate their merits:
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>
<q>R. Eleazar, son of Hyrcanus, is as a well-plastered cistern
which loses not a drop; Joshua, son of Chananya, happy are
his parents; José the priest is a saint; Simon, son of Nathanael,
fears sin; Eleazar, son of Arach, is a mighty spring.</q> He
used to say, <q>if all the Sages of Israel were in one scale of
the balance, and R. Eleazar, son of Hyrcanus, in the other, he
would outweigh them all.</q> Abba Saul said in his name, <q>if
all the Sages of Israel were in one scale, and even R. Eleazar,
son of Hyrcanus, with them, and R. Eleazar, son of Arach, in
the other, he would outweigh them all.</q>
</p>

<p>
9. He also said to them, <q>go forth and consider which is
the good path for man to cleave to?</q> To this R. Eleazar
answered, <q>a good eye.</q> R. Joshua said, <q>a good companion.</q>
R. José said, <q>a good neighbor.</q> R. Simon said, <q>he
who foresees the future.</q> R. Eleazar said, <q>a good heart.</q>
He then said to them, <q>I prefer the words of R. Eleazar, son
of Arach, above yours, as his words include yours.</q> He also
said to them, <q>go forth and consider which is the bad way
that man should shun</q>; to which R. Eleazar said, <q>a bad
eye.</q> R. Joshua said, <q>a bad companion.</q> R. José said,
<q>a bad neighbor.</q> R. Simon said, <q>he who borrows and
pays not; for when one borrows from man, it is as if he borrows
from God, as is said, <q>The wicked borroweth and payeth
not again; but the righteous showeth mercy and giveth.</q></q><note place='foot'>Ps.
xxxvii. 21.</note> R. Eleazar said, <q>a bad heart.</q> He then said to them, <q>I
prefer the words of R. Eleazar, son of Arach, above yours, as
his words include yours.</q>
</p>

<p>
10. They also said three things. R. Eleazar said, <q>let the
honor of thy companion be as dear to thee as thine own; and
be not easily moved to anger; and repent one day before thy
death; and warm thyself by the fire of the Sages, and be careful
that their coal does not burn thee, for their bite is as a bite
of a fox, and their sting is as the sting of a scorpion, and their
burn is the burn of a fiery serpent, and all their words are as
fiery coals.</q>
</p>

<p>
11. R. Joshua said, <q>the bad eye, the bad thought, and
envy of companions, cause the death of man.</q>
</p>

<p>
12. R. José said, <q>let thy companion's property be as dear
to thee as thine own; and prepare thyself to study the law, as it
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>
cometh not to thee by inheritance; and let all thine actions be
in the name of God.</q>
</p>

<p>
13. R. Simon said, <q>be careful of reading the <q>Hear,</q><note place='foot'>Deut. vi.
4, etc.</note> etc.,
and the other prayers; and when thou art praying consider
not thy prayer as fixed, but as supplicating mercy in the presence
of the Supreme, as is said, <q>For He is gracious and
merciful, slow to anger and of great kindness, and repenteth
Him of the evil</q>;<note place='foot'>Joel ii. 13.</note> and be not impious in thine
own sight.</q>
</p>

<p>
14. R. Eleazar said, <q>be diligent to study the law, that thou
mayest know how to confute the Epicurean; consider also in
whose presence thou art laboring, for the Master of thy work
is faithful to pay thee the reward of thy labor.</q>
</p>

<p>
15. R. Tarphon said, <q>the day is short, the labor vast, but
the laborers are slothful, though the reward is great, and the
Master of the house presseth for despatch.</q>
</p>

<p>
16. He used to say, <q>it is not incumbent upon thee to complete
the work, neither art thou free to cease from it. If thou
hast studied the law, great shall be thy reward; for the Master
of thy work is faithful to pay the reward of thy labor; but
know that the reward of the righteous is in the world to
come.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III</head>

<p>
1. Akabia, son of Mahallalel, said, <q>ponder on three things,
and thou wilt not be led to the commission of sin; consider
from whence thou comest, and whither thou goest; and in
whose presence thou must in futurity stand to account in judgment.
From whence comest thou? from a foul drop. And
whither goest thou? to a place of dust&mdash;worms&mdash;and reptiles;
and in whose presence art thou in future to account in judgment?
even before the King Who is King of kings, and the
HOLY ONE, blessed be He.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. Rabbi Chanina, suffragan of the priests, said, <q>pray for
the peace of the kingdom, for, were it not for its fear, men
would swallow each other alive.</q> Rabbi Chanina, son of
Theradion, said, <q>two who are sitting together and speak not
of the law are an assembly of scorners; as is said, <q>Nor sitteth
in the seat of the scornful.</q></q><note place='foot'>Ps. i. 1.</note> But two who sit
together,
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
and speak of the law, the DIVINE PRESENCE (Shechinah)
rests between them; as is said, <q>Then they that feared the
Lord spake often one to another; and the LORD hearkened
and heard; and a book of remembrance was written before
him for them that feared the Lord; and for them that thought
upon His name.</q><note place='foot'>Mal. iii. 16.</note> This refers to two; but whence
may we infer, that if but one sits engaged in the study of the law the
Holy One, blessed be He, will appoint him a reward? Because
it is said, <q>He sitteth alone and keepeth silence, because
he hath borne it upon him.</q><note place='foot'>Lam. iii. 28.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. Rabbi Simon said, <q>three who have eaten at one table
and have not spoken of the law, are to be considered as if they
had eaten of the sacrifices of the dead, for it is said, <q>For all
tables are full of vomit and filthiness, so that there is no place
clean.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. xxviii. 8.</note> But three who have eaten at one table
and have spoken of the law, are considered as if they had eaten at
GOD'S table, as is said, <q>And he said unto me, This is the
table that is before the LORD.</q></q><note place='foot'>Ezek. xli. 22.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. R. Chanina, son of Chanina, said, <q>he who wakes in the
night and travels in the road alone, and turns his heart to
vanity, is guilty of the death of his own soul.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. R. Nechunya, son of Hakana, said, <q>whoever lays on
himself the yoke of the law is relieved from the yoke of the
kingdom and the yoke of the custom of the world, and whoever
breaks off the yoke of the law, imposes on himself the
yoke of the kingdom and the yoke of the custom of the
world.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. R. Chalaphta of the village of Chananya said, <q>ten men
who assemble together and study the law, the Shechinah rests
among them, as is said, <q>God standeth in the congregation
of the mighty.</q></q><note place='foot'>Ps. lxxxii. 1.</note> And hence it is inferred
that it is also so with five, because it is said, <q>and hath founded his troop in
the earth.</q><note place='foot'>Amos ix. 6.</note> And hence it is inferred that it is
likewise so with three, because it is said, <q>He judgeth among the
gods.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. lxxxii. 1.</note> And hence it is inferred that it is
also thus with two, because it is said, <q>Then they that feared the Lord spake often
one to another, and the Lord hearkened and heard, etc.</q><note place='foot'>Mal. iii.
16.</note> And
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>
hence it is inferred that it is likewise so with one, because it
is said, <q>In all places where I record my name I will come
unto thee, and I will bless thee.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xx. 24.</note>
</p>

<p>
7. R. Eleazar of Barthota said, <q>give unto Him of His own,
for thou and all that thou hast are His.</q> And thus said David,
<q>For all things come of Thee, and of thine own have we given
Thee.</q><note place='foot'>1 Chron. xxix. 14.</note> R. Simon said, <q>he who journeys
on the road, meditating on the law, and ceases therefrom to admire this beautiful
tree or that beautiful fallow ground, is considered in Scripture
as endangering his life.</q>
</p>

<p>
8. R. Dosthai, the son of Jonai, in the name of R. Meier,
said, <q>whoever forgetteth anything of what he had obtained
by study, is considered in Scripture as having endangered his
life</q>; as is said, <q>Only take heed to thyself and guard thy soul
diligently, lest thou forget the things which thine eyes have
seen.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. iv. 9.</note> <q>Perhaps his study has been too
powerful for him?</q> <q>But it is said, <q>And lest they depart from thy heart all the
days of thy life.</q></q><note place='foot'>Deut. iv. 9.</note> Hence he endangers not
his life, till he deliberately removes them from his heart.
</p>

<p>
9. Rabbi Chanina, son of Dose, said, <q>whosoever's fear of
sin precedes his wisdom, his wisdom will remain; but whosoever's
wisdom precedes his fear of sin, his wisdom will not
remain.</q> He used to say, <q>whosoever's good deeds exceed
his wisdom, his wisdom will remain; but whosoever's wisdom
exceeds his good deeds, his wisdom will not remain.</q>
</p>

<p>
10. He also used to say, <q>with whomsoever the spirit of
his companions is gratified, the Spirit of God is gratified; but
with whomsoever the spirit of his companions is not gratified,
the Spirit of God is not gratified.</q> R. José, son of Harchinas,
said, <q>that morning sleep, noontide wine, childish conversation,
and the assembly of the ignorant, take man out of the
world.</q>
</p>

<p>
11. R. Eleazar Hamodai said, <q>he who profanes the holy
offerings, despises the solemn feasts, puts his neighbor to
shame in public, makes void the covenant of our father Abraham,
and expounds the law contrary to its true sense, although
he be well learned in the law and possessed of good deeds, yet
has he no share in the world to come.</q>
</p>

<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>

<p>
12. R. Ishmael said, <q>be humble to thy superior, and affable
to thy inferior, and receive all mankind with joy.</q>
</p>

<p>
13. R. Akiba said, <q>laughter and levity accustom mankind
to lewdness, tradition is a fence to the law, tithes are a
fence to riches, vows are a fence to abstinence, the fence to
wisdom is silence.</q>
</p>

<p>
14. He used to say, <q>man is beloved as he was created in
the image of God, but an additional love was shown to him
that he was created in the image of God, as is said, <q>In the
image of God he made man.</q><note place='foot'>Gen. ix. 6.</note> Beloved are Israel in
that they are called the children of God, but an additional love was
shown to them in that they are called the children of God,
as is said, <q>Ye are the children of the Lord your God.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. xiv.
1.</note> Beloved
are Israel, to whom was given the desirable vessel
wherewith the world was created, but an additional love was
shown unto them, that the desirable vessel wherewith the
world was created was given unto them, as is said, <q>For I give
you good doctrine, forsake ye not my law.</q></q><note place='foot'>Prov. iv. 2.</note>
</p>

<p>
15. <q>Everything is seen by God, though freedom of choice
is given unto man; the world is judged in goodness, though
all is according to the greatness of the work.</q>
</p>

<p>
16. He used to say, <q>everything is given to man on pledge,
and a net is spread over all living; the shop is open, and the
merchant credits; the ledger is open, and the hand records,
and whosoever chooses to borrow may come and borrow, as
the collectors are daily coming round and getting payment of
man, whether with his consent or without it, for they have
good authority to support them, and the judgment is true justice,
and all things are ready for the feast.</q>
</p>

<p>
17. R. Eleazar, son of Azariah, said, <q>if there be no law,
there is no morality, and if there be no morality, there is no
law; if there be no wisdom, there is no reverence, and if there
be no reverence, there is no wisdom; if there be no understanding,
there is no knowledge, and if there be no knowledge,
there is no understanding; if there be no meal, there can be
no study of the law, and if there be no law, there will be no
meal.</q> He used to say, <q>to what may he be likened whose
wisdom exceeds his goods deeds? To a tree whose branches
are many and his roots few, so that the wind comes and plucks
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
it up and overturns it, as is said, <q>For he shall be like the
heath in the desert, and he shall not see when good cometh,
but shall inhabit the parched places in the wilderness in a
salt land and not inhabited.</q><note place='foot'>Jer. xvii. 6.</note> But to what is
he like whose good deeds exceed his wisdom? To a tree whose branches
are few and its roots many, so that if all the winds in the world
come and assail it, they cannot move it from its place, as is
said, <q>For he shall be like a tree planted by the waters, and
that spreadeth out her roots by the river, and shall not see
when heat cometh, but her leaf shall be green and shall not be
careful in the year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding
fruit.</q></q><note place='foot'>Jer. xvii. 8.</note>
</p>

<p>
18. R. Eleazar, son of Chisma, said, <q>sacrifices of doves
and observance of times are important constitutions. Astronomy
and geometry are the ornaments of wisdom.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV</head>

<p>
1. The son of Zoma said, <q>Who is wise? He who is willing
to receive instruction from all men, as is said, <q>Than all
my teachers.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. cxix. 99.</note> Who is mighty? He who subdues his
evil imagination, as is said, <q>He that is slow to anger is better than
the mighty, and he that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh
a city.</q><note place='foot'>Prov. xvi. 32.</note> Who is rich? He who rejoices in his
lot, as is said, <q>For thou shalt eat the labor of thine hands, happy shalt thou
be and it shall be well with thee</q>;<note place='foot'>Ps. cxxviii. 2.</note> happy
shalt thou be in this world, and it shall be well with thee in the world to come.
Who is honorable? He who honors mankind, as is said, <q>For
them that honor me I will honor, and they that despise me
shall be lightly esteemed.</q></q><note place='foot'>1 Sam. ii. 30.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. Ben Asai said, <q>run to the performance of a slight precept
as though it were a grave one, and flee from transgression,
for the performance of a precept causes another precept, and
transgression causes transgression, as the reward of a commandment
is a commandment, and the reward of transgression
is transgression.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. He used to say, <q>despise not all men, nor oppose all
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
things, for there is no man who has not his hour, neither is
there anything that has not its place.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. Rabbi Levitas of Jabneh said, <q>be very humble of spirit,
as all the hope of man is to be food for worms.</q> Rabbi
Johanan, son of Beroka, said, <q>whosoever profanes God's
name in secret will be punished publicly, whether it be done
ignorantly or presumptuously, it is all one in the profanation
of God's name.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. Rabbi Ishmael, his son, said, <q>he who learns that he may
be able to teach others, will be enabled to study and to teach
others; but he who studies in order to perform the precepts,
will be enabled to study, teach, observe, and do the commandments.</q>
Rabbi Zadok said, <q>make not the study of the law
subservient to thy aggrandizement, neither make a hatchet
thereof to hew therewith.</q> And thus said Hillel, <q>whosoever
receiveth any emolument from the words of the law deprives
himself of life.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. Rabbi José said, <q>he who honors the law, his person
shall be honored by mankind; and he who profanes the law,
his person shall be dishonored by mankind.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. Rabbi Ishmael, his son, said, <q>he who avoids being a
judge, delivers himself from enmity, robbery, and false swearing;
but he who is arrogant in judging, is a proud wicked
fool.</q>
</p>

<p>
8. He used to say, <q>judge not alone, for none ought to
judge alone save ONE; neither say, receive ye my opinion, for
they are at liberty to accept it, but thou canst not compel
them.</q>
</p>

<p>
9. Rabbi Jonathan said, <q>whosoever performs the law in
poverty, shall in the end perform it in riches; but he who neglects
the law for riches, will in the end neglect it for poverty.</q>
</p>

<p>
10. Rabbi Meier said, <q>diminish your worldly affairs and
engage in the study of the law, and be humble in spirit before
all men; and if thou neglect the law, there are many
hinderances to oppose thee, but if thou hast labored in the
study of the law, there is much reward to be given thee.</q>
</p>

<p>
11. Rabbi Eliezer, the son of Jacob, said, <q>he who performs
but one precept gains for himself an advocate; and he
who commits a single sin, gains for himself an accuser; repentance
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>
and good deeds are a shield before the divine punishment.</q>
Rabbi Johannan Hasandelar said, <q>every congregation
formed for God will be permanent, but that which is
not for God will not be permanent.</q>
</p>

<p>
12. Rabbi Eliezer, son of Shamua, said, <q>let the honor of
thy disciple be as dear to thee as thine own, and the honor
of thy companion as the fear of thy master, and the fear of thy
master as the fear of God.</q>
</p>

<p>
13. Rabbi Judah said, <q>be careful in doctrine, for an error
in doctrine is presumptuous sin.</q> Rabbi Simon said, <q>there
are three crowns&mdash;the crown of the law, the crown of the
priesthood, and the crown of monarchy, but the crown of a
good name is better than all of them.</q>
</p>

<p>
14. Rabbi Nehorai said, <q>flee to a place where the law is
studied, and do not say that it will follow thee, for thy companions
will establish it for thee, and lean not to thine own
understanding.</q>
</p>

<p>
15. Rabbi Janai said, <q>the prosperity of the wicked and
the chastisements of the righteous are not in our hands.</q>
Rabbi Mathia, son of Charash, said, <q>be forward to greet all
men, and be rather as the tail of the lion, than as the head of
the foxes.</q>
</p>

<p>
16. Rabbi Jacob said, <q>this world may be likened to a
courtyard before the world to come, therefore prepare thyself
in the hall, to enter into the dining-room.</q>
</p>

<p>
17. He used to say, <q>one hour employed in repentance and
good deeds in this world is better than the whole life in the
world to come; and one hour's refreshment of spirit in the
world to come is better than the whole life in this world.</q>
</p>

<p>
18. Rabbi Simon, son of Eleazar, said, <q>try not to pacify
your neighbor in the moment of his anger, and do not console
him while his dead lies before him; inquire not of him in the
moment of his vowing, nor desire to see him in the time of
his calamity.</q>
</p>

<p>
19. The younger Samuel used to say, <q>rejoice not when
thine enemy falls, and let not thy heart be glad when he stumbles,
lest the Lord see it and it be evil in His sight, and He
turn His wrath from him.</q>
</p>

<p>
20. Elisha, son of Abuya, said, <q>he who teaches a child,
is like to one who writes on clean paper; but he who teaches
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
old people, is like to one who writes on blotted paper.</q> Rabbi
José, the son of Judah, of a village near Babylon, said, <q>to
what may he who learns the law from little children be
likened? To one who eats unripe grapes and drinks new
wine. And to what may he who learns the law from old men
be likened? To one who eats ripe grapes and drinks old wine.</q>
Rabbi Meier said, <q>look not at the flask, but that which is
therein, for there are new flasks full of old wine, and old flasks
which have not even new wine in them.</q>
</p>

<p>
21. Rabbi Eleazer Hakapher said, <q>envy, lust, and ambition
take men out of the world.</q>
</p>

<p>
22. He used to say, <q>those who are born are doomed to
die, the dead to live, and the quick to be judged, to make us
know, understand, and be informed that He is God. He is
the Former, Creator, Omniscient, Judge, Witness, and Claimant,
and He will judge thee hereafter, blessed be He; for in
His presence there is no unrighteousness, forgetfulness, respect
of persons, or acceptance of a bribe, for everything is His.
Know also that everything is done according to the account,
and let not thine evil imagination persuade thee that the grave
is a place of refuge for thee, for against thy will wast thou
formed, and against thy will wast thou born, and against thy
will dost thou live, and against thy will shalt thou die, and
against thy will must thou hereafter render an account and
receive judgment in the presence of the King of kings, the
Holy God, blessed be He.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V</head>

<p>
1. With ten expressions<note place='foot'>The Rabbis reckon that the expression
<q>God said</q> is used nine times in the first chapter of Genesis, and that the
tenth expression is to be found in the first verse, <q>In the beginning God created
the heaven and the earth.</q></note> the world was created. <q>But
wherefore is this taught, since God could have created it with
one expression?</q> <q>This is to punish the wicked, who destroy
the world that was created with ten expressions, and to
reward the righteous who establish the world created with ten
expressions.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. There were ten generations from Adam to Noah, to let
us know that God is long-suffering, as all those generations
provoked him before he brought the deluge upon them. There
<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>
were ten generations from Noah to Abraham, to let us know
that God is long-suffering, as all those generations provoked
him, until Abraham our father came and took the reward of
them all.
</p>

<p>
3. Our father Abraham was proved with ten trials, and in
all of them he stood firm; to let us know how great was the
love of our father Abraham to God.
</p>

<p>
4. Ten miracles were wrought for our fathers in Egypt, and
ten at the Red Sea. Ten plagues did the blessed God send
on the Egyptians in Egypt, and ten at the Red Sea. Ten
times did our fathers tempt the blessed God in the wilderness,
as is said, <q>And have tempted me now these ten times, and
have not hearkened to my voice.</q><note place='foot'>Num. xiv. 22.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. Ten miracles were wrought for our fathers in the holy
temple&mdash;no woman miscarried from the scent of the flesh of
the sacrifices; nor did the flesh of the sacrifices ever stink;
nor was a fly seen in the slaughter house; nor did legal uncleanness
happen to the high priest on the day of atonement;
nor did the rain extinguish the fire of the wood arranged on
the altar; nor did the wind prevent the straight ascension of
the pillar of smoke; nor was any defect found in the omer,
the two loaves, and the showbread; and though the people
stood close together, yet when they worshipped there was
room enough for all; nor did a serpent or scorpion injure a
person in Jerusalem; nor did a man say to his neighbor, I have
not room to lodge in Jerusalem.
</p>

<p>
6. Ten things were created on the eve of the Sabbath in the
twilight, and these are they&mdash;the mouth of the earth; the
mouth of the well; the mouth of the ass; the rainbow; the
manna; the rod of Moses; the shameer;<note place='foot'>The shameer is the worm which
knows how to hew stones, and helped Solomon to build the Temple.</note> the letters;
writing; and the tables of stone. And some say also the demons; and
the grave of our lawgiver Moses; and the ram of our father
Abraham; and some say the tongs, the model of the tongs.
</p>

<p>
7. Seven things are to be met with in a rude person, and
seven in a wise man. The wise man will not speak before
one who excels him in wisdom and years; nor will he interrupt
his companion in his discourse; nor is he in haste to answer;
he inquires according to the subject, and answers according
<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>
to the decision, and he will answer the first proposition first,
and the last proposition last; and what he has not heard he
will acknowledge he has not heard it; and he confesses the
truth. But the opposites of these are to be met with in a rude
person.
</p>

<p>
8. Seven kinds of punishment are brought on the world for
seven important sins; for when a part of the people give tithes
and the others do not, a scarcity and a dearth ensue, so that
some are filled and others suffer hunger; but when the whole
agree not to give tithes, a famine of dearth and confusion
ensues. If they offer not up the <q>cake,</q><note place='foot'>Num. xv. 20.</note>
confusion and fire ensue. Pestilence comes into the world for the commission
of sins said to be punished with death in the law, but which
are not recognized by our judges; and for not observing the
law concerning the fruits of the Sabbatical year. The sword
enters the world on account of the delay of justice and its
perversion; and on account of those who explain the law
contrary to its true sense.
</p>

<p>
9. Evil beasts come into the world on account of false swearing,
and the profanation of God's name. Captivity enters the
world on account of idolatry, immorality, bloodshed, and not
suffering the land to rest on the Sabbatical year. At four
seasons the pestilence is prevalent&mdash;in the fourth year, the
seventh, and the end of the seventh, and the end of the feast
of tabernacles in every year. In the fourth year, for not giving
the poor's tithe of the third year; in the seventh, for withholding
the poor's tithe of the sixth year; and at the end of the
seventh, on account of the fruits of the Sabbatical year; and
at the end of the feast of tabernacles yearly, on account of
robbing the poor of the gifts due to them.
</p>

<p>
10. There are four sorts of men: He who says, that which
is mine is mine, and that which is thine is thine, is a passable
custom, and some say this was the custom of Sodom. He
who says, what is thine is mine, and what is mine is thine, is
the custom of the ignorant. He who says, what is mine is
thine, and what is thine is also thine, is the custom of the pious.
He who says, what is mine is mine, and what is thine is mine,
is the custom of the wicked.
</p>

<p>
11. There are four sorts of passionate men: He who is
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>
easily provoked and easily pacified loses more than he gains;
he whom it is difficult to provoke and difficult to pacify gains
more than he loses; he whom it is difficult to provoke and
easy to pacify is pious; but he who is easily provoked and with
difficulty pacified is wicked.
</p>

<p>
12. There are four sorts of disciples: He who is quick to
hear and quick to forget loses more than he gains; he who
is slow to hear and slow to forget gains more than he loses;
he who is quick to hear and slow to forget is wise; he who
is slow to hear and quick to forget has an evil portion.
</p>

<p>
13. There are four sorts in those who bestow charity: He
who is willing to give but does not wish that others should
give, has an envious eye toward others; he who likes to see
others give but will not give, has an evil eye toward himself;
he who is willing to give and that others should also give, acts
piously; he who will not give and likes not that others should
give, acts wickedly.
</p>

<p>
14. There are four sorts in those who go to college: He
who goes but does not study, has only the reward of going;
he who studies and does not go, has the reward of action; he
who goes and studies, is pious; he who neither goes nor studies,
is wicked.
</p>

<p>
15. There are four sorts in those who sit before the Sages:
Those who act as a sponge, a funnel, a strainer, and a sieve;
as a sponge which sucks up all, as a funnel which receives at
one end and lets out at the other, as a strainer which lets the
wine pass through, but retains the lees, and as a sieve which
lets the bran pass through but retains the fine flour.
</p>

<p>
16. Every affection that depends on some carnal cause, if
that cause ceases the affection ceases, but that which does not
depend on such a cause will never cease. Where do we meet
with an affection dependent on a carnal cause? Such was
the love of Ammon to Tamar; but that which does not depend
on such a cause was the love of David and Jonathan.
</p>

<p>
17. Every dispute that is carried on for God's sake, will
in the end be established; but that which is not for God's
sake, will not be established. <q>What may be considered a
dispute for God's sake?</q> <q>Such as the disputes of Hillel
and Shammai; but that which was not for God's sake was the
contention of Korah and all his company.</q>
</p>

<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>

<p>
18. He who by his conduct justifies the public, no sin will
be caused through his means, and whosoever causes the public
to sin is not suffered to repent. Moses acted justly and caused
the public to obtain merit: the merit of the public was attributed
to him, as is said, <q>He executed the justice of the
Lord and his judgments with Israel.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. xxxiii. 21.</note>
Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, sinned, and caused Israel to sin: the sin of the public was
attributed to him, as is said, <q>Because of the sins of Jeroboam,
who did sin, and who made Israel to sin.</q><note place='foot'>1 Kings xiv. 16.</note>
</p>

<p>
19. He who possesses these three virtues is of the disciples
of our father Abraham, and he who is possessed of the three
opposites is of the disciples of the wicked Balaam. The disciples
of our father Abraham possess a benevolent eye, a
humble spirit, and a contented mind. The disciples of Balaam
have an evil eye, a haughty spirit, and a narrow mind. <q>What
is the difference between the disciples of our father Abraham
and the disciples of the wicked Balaam?</q> <q>The disciples of
our father Abraham eat of the fruit of their good works in this
world, and inherit the future one, for it is said, <q>That I may
cause those that love me to inherit substance, and I will fill
their treasures.</q><note place='foot'>Prov. viii. 21.</note> But the disciples of the
wicked Balaam inherit hell and descend to the pit of destruction, as is said, <q>But
Thou, O God, shalt bring them down into the pit of destruction;
bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their
days, but I will trust in Thee.</q></q><note place='foot'>Ps. lv. 23.</note>
</p>

<p>
20. Judah, son of Tamai, said, <q>be bold as a leopard, light
as an eagle, swift as a roe, and strong as a lion, to do the
will of Thy Father, who is in heaven.</q> He used to say, <q>the
impudent are for hell and the modest for paradise. May it
be acceptable in Thy presence, O Lord our God! that Thy city
may speedily be rebuilt in our days, and let our portion be
in Thy law.</q>
</p>

<p>
21. He also said, <q>at five years of age a child should study
the Bible; at ten he should study the Mishna; at thirteen he
should observe the precepts; at fifteen he should study the
Gemara; at eighteen he should get married; at twenty he should
study the law; at thirty he is arrived at full strength; at forty
he is arrived at understanding; at fifty he is able to give counsel;
at sixty he is accounted aged; at seventy he is hoary; at
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
eighty he may still be accounted strong; at ninety he is only
fit for the pit;<note place='foot'>Or, perhaps, <q>for meditation.</q></note> at 100 he
is as if already dead and forgotten from the world.</q>
</p>

<p>
22. The son of Bagbag said, <q>ponder the law again and
again, for all things are in it; contemplate it always, and depart
not from it, for there is nothing to be preferred to it.</q>
</p>

<p>
23. The son of Haha said, <q>the reward is proportioned to
the labor.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI</head>

<p>
1. The Sages studied in the language of the Mishna; blessed
be He who made choice of them and their learning. R. Meier
said, <q>he who is engaged in the study of the law for its own
sake merits many things, and not only so, but the whole world
is under the greatest obligation to him; he is called a dear
friend, dear to God and dear to mankind; he rejoices God and
rejoices His creatures. It clothes him with meekness and the
fear of God, and directs him to become just, pious, righteous,
and faithful; it removes him from sin, and brings him near to
merit, and the world is benefited by his counsel, sound wisdom,
understanding, and strength; as is said, <q>Counsel is mine, and
sound wisdom; I am understanding, I have strength.</q><note place='foot'>Prov. viii.
14.</note> It also bestows on him empire, dominion, and perception in
judgment. It reveals the secrets of the law to him, and he
shall be an increasing fountain, and a never-failing river; and
it will cause him to be modest, slow to anger, and ready to
pardon an injury done to him; and it will magnify and exalt
him above all things.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. R. Joshua, son of Levi, said, <q>every day a Divine voice
(<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>bath kol</foreign>) proceeds from Mount Horeb, which
proclaims and says, <q>Woe be to those who contemn the law; for whoever is
not engaged in the study of the law may be considered as excommunicate</q>;
for it is said, <q>as a jewel of gold in a swine's
snout, so is a fair woman which is without discretion</q>;<note place='foot'>Prov. xi.
22.</note> and it is said, <q>And the tables were the work of God, and the
writing was the writing of God, graven upon the tables.</q><note place='foot'>Ex. xxxii.
16.</note> Read not graven but freedom; for who are counted free but
those engaged in the study of the law, and whoever is engaged
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
in the study of the law is exalted; as it is said, <q>And from
Mattanah to Nahaliel, and from Nahaliel to Bamoth.</q></q><note place='foot'>Num. xxi.
19.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. He who learns from his companion one chapter, sentence,
verse, or expression, ought to behave toward him with respect;
for thus we find by David, King of Israel, who having learned
only two things from Ahitophel, called him his teacher, guide,
and acquaintance, as is said, <q>But it was thou, a man mine
equal, my guide, and mine acquaintance.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. lv. 13.</note> Hence
it may be deduced that if David, King of Israel, who having learned
only two things from Ahitophel, called him his <q>teacher,
guide, and acquaintance,</q> how much more ought he who
learns from his companion a single chapter, sentence, verse,
or expression, to show him the utmost respect? And there
is no glory but the knowledge of the law; as is said, <q>The wise
shall inherit glory</q>;<note place='foot'>Prov. iii. 35.</note> and the perfect shall
inherit the good; but nothing is really good but the law, as is said, <q>For I give
you good doctrine, forsake ye not my law.</q><note place='foot'>Prov. iv. 2.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. Thus is the law to be observed: Thou shalt eat bread
and salt, and water by measure shalt thou drink; on the earth
shalt thou sleep, and a life of trouble shalt thou live; and thou
shalt labor in the study of the law. If thou doest thus, thou
shalt be happy, and it shall be well with thee; thou shalt be
happy in this world, and it shall be well with thee in the world
to come.
</p>

<p>
5. Seek not grandeur for thyself, neither covet more honor
than thy learning merits. Crave not after the tables of kings;
for thy table is greater than their table, and thy crown is greater
than their crown; and the Master who employs thee is faithful
to pay thee the reward of thy labor.
</p>

<p>
6. The law is more excellent than the priesthood and royalty;
for royalty is acquired by thirty properties, and the priesthood
by twenty-four; but the law is acquired by forty-eight
things, and these are they&mdash;with study, attention, eloquence;
an understanding heart, an intelligent heart; with dread and
meekness, fear and joy; with attendance on the Sages, the
acuteness of companions, and disputations of the disciples;
with sedateness, the study of the Bible, and the Mishna; in
purity, in taking little sleep, in using little discourse, in being
little engaged in traffic, in taking little sport, in enjoying little
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
delight and little worldly manners; in being slow to anger,
in having a good heart, in having faith in the Sages, and in
bearing chastisements; in being sensible of his situation, and
rejoicing in his portion; in being circumspect in his language,
in not pretending to pre-eminence, in sincerely loving God,
and loving His creatures; in loving admonition, and that which
is right; in avoiding honor, and in not priding himself on his
acquired knowledge; not rejoicing in pronouncing sentence,
in bearing the burden equally with his companion, and inclining
him to merit, and confirming him in the truth and in peace;
is sedate in his study, inquires according to the subject, and
answers according to the constitution; is attentive to study,
and extends it; learns it with a view to the teaching of others,
and also with a view to perform the precepts; increases his
teacher's knowledge, and is attentive to his instruction, and
reports everything in the name of the person who said it; hence
it is inferred that whoever reports anything in the name of the
person who said it, procures redemption for the world, as is
said, <q>And Esther certified the king thereof in Mordecai's
name.</q><note place='foot'>Esther ii. 22.</note>
</p>

<p>
7. Great is the law, which bestows life on the doers of it,
both in this world and in the world to come; as is said, <q>For
they are life unto those that find them, and health to all their
flesh.</q><note place='foot'>Prov. iv. 22.</note> And it is said, <q>It shall be health
to thy navel, and marrow to thy bones.</q><note place='foot'>Prov. iii. 8.</note> And it
is said, <q>She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her; and happy is everyone
that retaineth her.</q><note place='foot'>Prov. iii. 18.</note> And it is said, <q>For
they shall be an ornament of grace unto thy head, and chains about thy
neck.</q><note place='foot'>Prov. i. 9.</note> And it is said, <q>She shall give to thine
head an ornament of grace; a crown of glory shall she deliver to
thee.</q><note place='foot'>Prov. iv. 9.</note> And it
is said, <q>Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left
hand riches and honor.</q><note place='foot'>Prov. iii. 16.</note> And it is said,
<q>For length of days and long life, and peace shall they add to
thee.</q><note place='foot'>Prov. iii. 2.</note>
</p>

<p>
8. Rabbi Simeon, son of Judah, in the name of Rabbi
Simeon, son of Jochai, said, <q>beauty, strength, riches, honor,
wisdom, age, hoariness, and many children, are suitable for
the righteous, and suitable for the world; as is said, <q>The
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of
righteousness.</q><note place='foot'>Prov. xvi. 31.</note> And it is said, <q>Children's
children are the crown of old men, and the glory of children are their
fathers.</q><note place='foot'>Prov. xvii. 6.</note>
And it is said, <q>Then the moon shall be confounded, and the
sun ashamed, when the Lord of Hosts shall reign on Mount
Zion, and in Jerusalem; and before his ancients gloriously.</q></q><note place='foot'>Isa.
xxiv. 23.</note>
</p>

<p>
9. Rabbi Simeon, son of Manasya, said, <q>those seven qualities
which the Sages counted as proper for the righteous, were
all established in the Rabbi (Judah) and his children.</q> Rabbi
José, son of Kishma, said, <q>I was once travelling along the
road and met a certain person, who saluted me with peace,
and I returned his salutation. He then said to me, <q>Rabbi,
whence art thou?</q> I answered him, <q>from a great city
abounding in sages and scribes:</q> said he to me, <q>if thou be
willing to dwell with us in our city, then will I give thee a
thousand thousand golden dinars, and precious stones and
pearls.</q> To this I answered, <q>if thou wouldst give me all
the silver and gold, and precious stones and pearls in the
world, I would only dwell in a place where the law is studied;
because at the time of man's departure from this world he
is not accompanied either with silver and gold, and precious
stones and pearls, but with the law and good deeds alone,
as is said, <q>When thou goest it shall lead thee: when thou
sleepest it shall keep thee: and when thou awakest it shall talk
with thee.</q></q></q><note place='foot'>Prov. vi. 22.</note> <q>When thou goest it shall
lead thee,</q> that is in this world. <q>When thou sleepest it shall keep thee,</q> in
the grave; <q>and when thou awakest it shall talk with thee,</q>
in the world to come. And thus it is written in the book of
Psalms by the hand of David, King of Israel, <q>The law of
thy mouth is better to me than thousands of gold and silver.</q><note place='foot'>Ps.
cxix. 72.</note> And it is said, <q>The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, saith
the Lord of Hosts.</q><note place='foot'>Hag. ii. 8.</note>
</p>

<p>
10. Five possessions hath the Holy One, blessed be He,
obtained in this world, and these are they&mdash;the law is one
possession; heaven and earth another; Abraham another;
Israel another; and the holy Temple another. Now whence
is it to be proved that the law is one possession? Because
it is written, <q>The LORD possessed me in the beginning of
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
His way before His works of old.</q><note place='foot'>Prov. viii. 22.</note> And whence
is it proved that heaven and earth is another possession? Because it is
said, <q>Thus saith the Lord, The heaven is my throne and the
earth is my footstool; where is the house that ye build unto
me? and where is the place of my rest?</q><note place='foot'>Isa. lxvi. 1.</note> And it
is said, <q>O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom hast thou
made them all; the earth is full of thy riches.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. civ. 24.</note>
Whence is it proved that Abraham is one possession? Because it is
written, <q>And he blessed him, and said blessed be Abraham
of the most high God, possessor of heaven and earth.</q><note place='foot'>Gen. xiv.
19.</note> Whence is it proved that Israel is one possession? Because
it is written, <q>Till thy people pass over, O Lord, till the people
pass over, which thou hast purchased.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xv. 16.</note> And it
is said, <q>But to the saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent, in whom
is all my delight.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. xvi. 3.</note> Whence can it be proved that
the holy temple is one possession? Because it is said, <q>The sanctuary,
O Lord, which thy hands have established.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xv. 17.</note> And
it is said, <q>And he brought them to the border of his sanctuary, even
to this mountain which his right hand hath purchased.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. lxxviii.
54.</note> Everything which God created, he created but for his glory;
as is said, <q>Everyone that is called by my name; for I have
created him for my glory, I have formed him; yea, I have
made him.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. xliii. 7.</note> And the Lord will reign forever
and ever. R. Chanina, son of Akasea, said, <q>the Holy One, Blessed be
He, wished to purify Israel, wherefore He magnified for them
the Law and the Commandments, as is said, <q>The Lord is
well pleased for his righteousness' sake; he will magnify the
law and make it honorable.</q></q><note place='foot'>Isa. xlii. 21.</note>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Daily Sacrifice</head>

<quote rend='display'>
Guarding the Temple at Night&mdash;Taking the Ashes Off the Altar&mdash;Casting
Lots&mdash;Opening the Temple in the Morning&mdash;Arranging the Fire on
the Altar&mdash;The Wood-Kindling&mdash;Allotting Services&mdash;Examination
of the Daily Sacrifice&mdash;Slaughter-house&mdash;Sounds Heard at Jericho&mdash;Snuffing
the Candlestick&mdash;Position of the Lamb when Slain&mdash;Pouring
Out its Blood&mdash;Preparations for Burning&mdash;Order of Carrying the
Members to the Altar&mdash;Blessings&mdash;Cleansing the Vessels of the Holy
Place&mdash;The High Priest on the Altar&mdash;Music and Psalm-Singing.
</quote>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I</head>

<p>
1. The Priests guarded the sanctuary in three places<note place='foot'>See
the treatise on <q>Measurements,</q>
<ref target='talmud_measurements_chap_i'>chap. i</ref>.</note>&mdash;in
the House Abtinas, in the House Nitzus, and in the House
Moked. The House Abtinas and the House Nitzus had
upper chambers, and the young priests guarded there. The
House Moked was arched, and its large chamber was surrounded
with stone divans, and the elders of the House of
the Fathers slept there, with the keys of the court in their
hands; and the younger priests also slept there, each with
his cushion on the ground. They did not sleep in the holy
garments, but they undressed, and folded them, and put
them under their heads, and they covered themselves with
their own dresses. If legal defilement happened to one of
them, he went out, and proceeded in the circuit that went
under the Temple, and candles flamed on either side, until he
arrived in the house of baptism. And the fire pile was there,
and the place of the seat of honor; and this was its honor,
when he found it closed, he knew that someone was there;
when he found it open he knew that no one was there. He
descended and washed; he came up and wiped himself, and
warmed himself before the fire pile. He came and sat beside
his brethren the priests, till the doors were opened; then he
went out on his own way.
</p>

<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>

<p>
2. He who wished to take the ashes from the altar, rose
up early and bathed before the Captain of the Temple came.
And in what hour did the Captain come? All times were
not equal; sometimes he came at cockcrow, or near to it, before
or after it. The Captain came, and knocked for them,
and they opened to him. He said to them, <q>let whoever is
washed, come, and cast lots.</q> They cast lots, and he gained
who gained.
</p>

<p>
3. He took the key and opened the wicket door, and entered
from the House Moked to the court, and the priests
went after him with two lighted torches in their hands. And
they divided themselves into two parties. These went in the
gallery eastward, and those went in the gallery westward.
They observed everything as they walked till they approached
the place of the pancake-makers. They arrived. Both parties
said, peace! all peace! The pancake-makers began to
make pancakes.
</p>

<p>
4. He who gained the lot to take the ashes from the altar,
took them; and they said to him, <q>be careful that thou touch
not the vessels, till thou dost sanctify thy hands and thy feet
from the laver.</q> And the ash dish was placed in the corner
between the ascent to the altar and the west of the ascent.
No man entered with the priest, and there was no candle in
his hand, but he walked toward the light of the fire on the
altar. They did not see him, and they did not hear his voice,
till they heard the creaking of the wheel, which the son of
Kattin made for the laver, and they said, <q>the time has come
to sanctify his hands and feet from the laver.</q> He took the
silver ash dish, and he went up to the top of the altar, and he
turned the live coals on one side, and he piled up those that
were well burned inward, and he descended, and came on the
pavement of the altar. He turned his face northward, and
went eastward of the ascent about ten cubits. He packed the
coals on the pavement three hand-breadths distant from the
ascent, at the place where they put the crops of the fowls, and
the ashes of the inner altar, and of the candlestick.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II</head>

<p>
1. His brethren saw him come down, and they came running
to him. They hastened and sanctified their hands and
their feet from the laver. They took the brushes and the forks,
and went up to the top of the altar. The members and the
cauls<note place='foot'>Membranes over the fat.</note> (of the sacrifices) which were not
consumed over night, they moved to the side of the altar. If the sides could not
contain them, they laid them out in a closet at the ascent.
</p>

<p>
2. They commenced to bring up the ashes to the top of
the heap,<note place='foot'>In the form of an apple.</note> and the heap was on the
middle of the altar. Sometimes there was on it about 300 cors;<note place='foot'>A cor
was equal, according to the Rabbis, to 44.286 gallons, but Josephus
reckons it to have been 86.696 gallons.</note> but in the holidays they
did not clear away the ashes, since they were an honor for the
altar. Never was the priest lazy in removing the ashes.
</p>

<p>
3. The priests began bringing up the fagots to arrange
the fire of preparation on the altar. <q>Was, then, all wood
allowed for preparation?</q> <q>Yes, all wood was allowed for
the fire of preparation, except that of the olive and that of
the vine. But these they preferred&mdash;branches of the fig-tree,
of the nut, and of the pine.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. The priests arranged the great fire of preparation eastward,
and then made an opening eastward, so that the heads
of the inward fagots touched the heap on the altar. And
there was a division between the fagots, that the priests might
kindle the chips there.
</p>

<p>
5. The priest chose from the fagots the best figwood to
arrange the second fire of preparation for the incense opposite
the western horn southward. He prolonged it from the horn
toward the north four cubits, reckoning for five seahs<note place='foot'>A seah,
according to the Rabbis, was 1.4762 gallon.</note> of live
coals, and on the Sabbath he reckoned for eight seahs of live
coals. As they placed there the two cups of frankincense of
the showbread. The members and cauls (of the sacrifices)
which were not consumed by the fire overnight, were returned
again by the priests to the great fire of preparation. And they
kindled both the preparations with fire; and they came down,
and entered into the chamber of hewn stone.<note place='foot'>Or, of <q>the
treasurers.</q></note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III</head>

<p>
1. The Captain of the Temple said to the priests, <q>come
and cast lots.</q> <q>Who is to slaughter?</q> <q>Who is to
sprinkle?</q> <q>Who is to take the ashes from the inner altar?</q>
<q>Who is to take the ashes from the candlestick?</q> <q>Who is
to bring up the members to the ascent, the head and the right
foot, and the two hind feet, the chine, and the left foot, the
breast, and the throat, and the two sides, the inwards, and the
fine flour, and the pancakes and the wine?</q> They cast lots,
and he gained who gained.
</p>

<p>
2. The Captain said to them, <q>go and see if the time for
slaughter approaches?</q> If it approached, the watchman said,
<q>it brightens.</q> Matthia, son of Samuel, said, <q>is it light in
the whole east, even to Hebron?</q> and he said, <q>yes.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. He said to them, <q>go and bring the lamb from the lamb-chamber.</q>
The lamb-chamber was in the northwest corner
of the court, and there were four chambers there, one the
lamb-chamber, one the seal-chamber,<note place='foot'>In this chamber were kept the
<q>seals</q> or <q>tokens</q> given to those persons who bought their offerings from
the Levites. These <q>seals</q> were of four sorts, and were respectively inscribed
with <q>calf</q> or <q>kid,</q> according to the offerings to be presented; and
with the word <q>male</q> when the offering was to be a ram; and <q>sinner</q>
when it was to be a sin-offering.</note> and one chamber for
the burning materials, and one chamber where they made
showbread.
</p>

<p>
4. The priests entered the chamber for the vessels, and they
brought out ninety-three vessels of silver and gold. They
made the daily sacrifice drink in a golden cup. Even though
he was examined the night before, they examined him again
by torch-light.
</p>

<p>
5. He who gained the lot for the daily sacrifice, led the
lamb to the slaughter-house, and those who gained the lots
for the members, went after him. The slaughter-house was
to the north of the altar, and in it were eight dwarf pillars,
and beams of cedar-wood were fastened upon them, and iron
hooks were fastened in them. And there were three rows
of hooks to each of them. Upon them the priests hung the
sacrifices, and skinned them, near the marble tables between
the pillars.
</p>

<p>
6. Those who gained the lot for the removal of the ashes
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
from the inner altar, and the ashes from the candlestick, advanced
with four vessels in their hands, a flagon<note place='foot'>Others read <q>a
basket.</q></note> and a cup<note place='foot'>Or jug.</note>
and two keys. The flagon resembled a great golden measure
containing two cabs and a half. And the cup resembled a
great golden jug. And the two keys to the sanctuary. One
key entered the lock up to the shoulder of the priest, and one
opened quickly.
</p>

<p>
7. The priest came to the wicket on the north, and there
were two wickets in the great gate, one in the north and one
in the south. Through that in the south man never entered,
and Ezekiel explains it. <q>Then said the Lord unto me: This
gate shall be shut, it shall not be opened, and no man shall
enter in by it; because the Lord, the God of Israel, hath entered
in by it, therefore it shall be shut.</q><note place='foot'>Ezek. xliv. 2.</note> He took
the key and opened the wicket; he entered the chamber, and he went
from the chamber into the sanctuary, until he came to the
great gate. When he came to the great gate, he took down
the bar and the bolts and opened it. The slaughterer did not
slaughter till he heard the noise of the opening of the great
gate.
</p>

<anchor id='talmud_daily_chap_iii_8'/>
<p>
8. From Jericho<note place='foot'>Jericho is about eighteen miles distant
from Jerusalem.</note> people heard the opening of the great
gate. From Jericho they heard the noise of the shovel.<note place='foot'>Perhaps <q>a
gong</q> or <q>a bell.</q> Some think it to have been a <q>musical
instrument,</q> and others consider it to have been <q>an organ.</q></note>
From Jericho they heard the noise of the wooden wheel which
the son of Kattin made for the laver. From Jericho they
heard the voice of Gabini the herald. From Jericho they heard
the sound of the cornet. From Jericho they heard the sound
of the cymbal. From Jericho they heard the voice of the song.
From Jericho they heard the clang of the horn, and some
say even the voice of the High Priest at the time when he mentioned
the Name on the Day of Atonement. From Jericho
they smelled the odor of the preparation of incense. Said R.
Eleazar, the son of Daglai, <q>the family of Aba had goats on
the mountains of Mikvor,<note place='foot'>Some think <q>Machærus</q> on the
east of the Dead Sea, about fifty miles distant from Jerusalem.</note> and they used to
sneeze from the odor of the preparation of the incense.</q>
</p>

<p>
9. The priest who gained the lot for removing the ashes
from the inner altar entered, and took the flagon and laid it
<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>
before him, and he took handfuls of ashes and filled them
into the flagon, and at last he brushed the remainder into it.
And he left it and went out (of the holy place). He who
gained the lot for removing the snuff from the candlestick,
entered and found the two eastern lights burning. He snuffed
the rest, and left these burning in their place. If he found
them extinguished, he snuffed them, and lighted them again
from those still burning, and afterward he snuffed the rest.
And there was a stone before the candlestick, and in it were
three steps, on which the priest stood and trimmed the lights.
And he placed the cup with the snuff on the second step, and
went out.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV</head>

<p>
1. The priests did not tie the four feet of the lamb together,
but they bound its fore and hind feet. He who gained the
lot for carrying the members, held it; and thus was it bound,
its head southward, and its face westward. The slaughterer
stood in the east with his face westward. The morning sacrifice
was slaughtered at the northwestern corner on the second
ring. The evening sacrifice was slaughtered at the northeastern
corner on the second ring. The slaughterer slaughtered,
and the receiver caught (the blood). The priest came
to the northeastern corner of the altar, and he sprinkled the
blood northeast. He came to the southwest, and sprinkled
the blood southwest:<note place='foot'>In each act of sprinkling, the priest,
standing before a corner, sprinkled the blood on two sides of the altar. And
thus, in two acts of sprinkling, he put the blood on its four sides.</note> the remainder
of the blood he poured out on the southern altar-base.
</p>

<p>
2. The priest did not break its leg, but he made a hole in
the midst of its side, and by that it was hung up. He skinned
it downward till he came to the breast. When he came to the
breast, he cut off the head, and gave it to him who had gained
(its lot). He cut off the two hind feet, and gave them to him
who had gained them for his lot. He finished the skinning;
he tore out the heart, that the blood should come out. He
cut off the two fore feet, and gave them to him who had gained
them for his lot. He came to the right leg; he cut it off, and
gave it to him who had gained it for his lot. He cleft the
<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>
body, and it became all open before him. He took out the
caul, and put it on the place of slaughter, with the head on
the top of it. He took out the intestines and gave them to
him who had gained them for his lot to cleanse them. And
the belly they cleansed in the house of the washers, as much
as was needful. And the intestines were cleansed three times
at least, upon the marble tables between the pillars.
</p>

<p>
3. The priest took the knife and separated the lungs from
the liver, and the finger of the liver from the liver, but he did
not remove it from its place. He made a hole in the breast,
and gave it to him who gained it for his lot. He came to the
right side, and he cut it downward to the backbone, but he
did not touch the backbone, till he came to the two tender
ribs. He cut it off and gave it to him who gained it for his
lot, with the liver hanging upon it. He came to the neck,
and left the two side bones on both sides. He cut it off and
gave it to him who had gained it for his lot, with the windpipe
and the heart and the lungs hanging upon it. He came to
the left side, and left on it the two tender ribs, above and below,
and so he left it on the corresponding side. It follows that
he left on the two sides, two and two ribs above, and two and
two ribs below. He cut it off, and gave it to him who gained
it for his lot, the backbone with it, and the spleen hanging
upon it. And it was large, but the right side is called large,
as the liver hangs upon it. He came to the tail; he cut it off
and gave it to him who gained it for his lot, and the fat, and
the finger of the liver, and the two kidneys with it. He took
the left hind leg, and gave it to him who gained it for his lot.
It follows that all the priests stood in one row with the members
in their hands. The first priest with the head and hind
foot, the head in his right hand with the nose toward his arm,
and the horns between his fingers, and the place of slaughter
upward, and the caul placed on it; and the right hind foot
in his left hand with the skin outside. The second priest
stood with the two fore legs, the right in his right hand, and
the left in his left hand, and the skin outside. The third priest
stood with the tail and the hind foot; the tail in his right hand,
and the fat wrapped between his fingers, and the finger of the
liver and the two kidneys with it; the left foot was in his left
hand with the skin outward. The fourth priest stood with the
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>
breast and the throat. The breast was in his right hand, and
the throat in his left, and its side bones between his fingers.
The fifth priest stood with the two sides, the right side in his
right hand, and the left side in his left hand, and the skinny
side outward. The sixth priest stood with the intestines placed
in a pan, and the legs over them. The seventh priest stood
with the fine flour. The eighth priest stood with the pancakes.
The ninth priest stood with the wine. They then proceeded
and deposited the members on the lower half of the
ascent westward, and they salted them, and descended, and
came to the chamber of the hewn stone to read the <q>Hear,</q><note place='foot'>Called
the Shema. It consisted of the following three passages of Scripture, as given
in the next footnotes.</note>
etc.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V</head>

<p>
1. The Captain of the Watch said, <q>give one blessing,</q>
and the priests blessed and read the ten commandments,
<q>Hear,</q><note place='foot'>Deut. vi. 4-9.</note> etc. <q>And it shall come to pass
if ye shall hearken,</q><note place='foot'>Deut. xi. 13-21.</note> etc. And <q>He
spake,</q><note place='foot'>Num. xv. 37-41.</note> etc. They then gave the
three blessings to the people, <q>Truth and Sureness,</q> and <q>the
Service,</q> and <q>the Blessing of the Priests.</q> And on the Sabbath
they added one blessing for the outgoing Temple-guard.
</p>

<p>
2. He said to them, <q>novices<note place='foot'>The lot for the incense was always
arranged for a new man who had never burned it before. It might come to a
priest once in his lifetime, and never again afterward. Luke i. 9.</note> to the incense,
come and cast lots.</q> They cast lots. He gained who gained. He said
to them, <q>novices with old men come and cast lots, who shall
bring up the members of the lamb from the ascent to the
altar.</q> R. Eliezer, the son of Jacob, said, <q>those priests who
brought the members to the ascent must also bring them to
the top of the altar.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. He handed the priests over to the sextons. They divested
them of their dresses, leaving them their breeches only,
and there were windows there, and over them was written,
<q>used for vestments.</q><note place='foot'>The chambers for vestments had
separate rooms for each of the twenty-four courses, and separate wardrobes for
each of the four kinds of vestments.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. He who gained the lot for the incense, took the spoon;
and the spoon resembled a great measure of gold containing
<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>
three cabs. And the pan was heaped full of incense; and it
had a covering like a kind of weight upon it.
</p>

<p>
5. He who gained the lot for the censer, took the silver
censer, and went up to the top of the altar, and he turned the
live coals here and there, and he put them into the censer.
He descended, and poured them into a censer of gold. There
was dispersed from them about a cab of live coals, and he
brushed them into the channel for refuse. On the Sabbath
he put over them a cover. And the cover was a great vessel
containing a letech.<note place='foot'>About 37-1/2 gallons.</note>
And there were two chains to it, one
by which the priest drew it down, and one by which he held
it from above, that it should not be rolled about; and it was
useful for three purposes, as a covering over the live coals,
and as a covering over the reptile on the Sabbath, and it was
also used to carry down the ashes from the altar.
</p>

<p>
6. The priests arrived between the porch and the altar. One
of them took the shovel,<note place='foot'>See note 5,
<ref target='talmud_daily_chap_iii_8'>chap. iii. 8</ref>.</note>
and flung it between the porch and
the altar. No one could hear the voice of his neighbor in
Jerusalem from the rattling of the shovel. And it was useful
for three purposes: when the priest heard its rattle, he knew
that his brother priests were entering to worship, and he came
running; and the Levite, when he heard its rattle, knew that
his brother Levites were entering to chant, and he came running;
and the chief of the Delegates<note place='foot'>The Delegates were appointed to
represent the whole congregation of Israel in the temple services.</note>
compelled the defiled men to stand in the eastern gate of the Temple.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI</head>

<p>
1. The priests began ascending the steps of the porch. They
who gained the lot for the removal of ashes from the inner
altar and from the candlestick, proceeded in front. He who
gained the lot for the removal of ashes from the inner altar,
entered the Holy Place, and took the flagon, and he bowed
down and went out. He who gained the lot for the removal
of snuff from the candlestick, entered the Holy Place, and
found the two eastern lamps burning; he removed the snuff
from the eastern one and left the western one burning, and
from it he lighted the candlestick in the evening. If he found
<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>
it extinguished, he removed the snuff, and lit it from the altar
of burnt offerings. He took the cup from the second step,
and he bowed down, and went out.
</p>

<p>
2. He who gained the lot for the censer, gathered the live
coals on the top of the altar of incense; and he smoothed them
with the bottom of the censer, and he bowed down, and went
out.
</p>

<p>
3. He who gained the lot for the incense, took the pan from
the cup, and gave it to his friend or to his neighbor. When
the incense was dispersed in it, he supplied it to him in handfuls.
And he instructed him, <q>be careful and do not begin
too near yourself, lest you be burned.</q> He smoothed it and
went out. The offerer could not offer the incense, till the
Captain said to him, <q>offer incense.</q> If the offerer were the
high priest, the captain said, <q>My Lord, High Priest, offer
the incense.</q> The people dispersed, and he offered the incense,
and he bowed down and went out from the Holy Place.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VII</head>

<p>
1. When the High Priest entered to worship, three priests
had hold of him, one on his right hand, one on his left hand,
and one by the jewels on his breast-plate. And so soon as
the Captain of the Temple heard the sound of the footsteps
of the High Priest as he proceeded on his way, he lifted the
veil for him. He entered the holy place, bowed himself, and
went out. And his brethren the priests entered, and bowed
down, and went out.
</p>

<p>
2. The priests came and stood on the steps of the porch.
The first came and stood to the south of his brother priests.
And they had five vessels in their hands&mdash;the flagon in the
hand of one, and the cup in the hand of one, and the censer
in the hand of one, and the pan in the hand of one, and the
spoon with its cover in the hand of one. They blessed the
people once. In the city they said the service in three
blessings, but in the sanctuary they said it in one blessing.
In the sanctuary they pronounced the Name<note place='foot'>Jehovah.</note> as it is
written, but in the city they pronounced it by its substitute.<note place='foot'>That is
by substituting for the Name (Jehovah) the word <q>Adonai,</q> except
where <q>Adonai</q> and <q>Jehovah</q> come together. In such cases <q>Elohim</q> is
substituted for <q>Jehovah.</q></note> In the
<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>
city the priests raised their hands (in blessing) opposite their
shoulders, but in the sanctuary they raised them above their
heads, excepting the High Priest, who could not lift his hands
above the golden plate. R. Judah said, <q>even the High Priest
could lift his hands above the golden plate, as is said, <q>Aaron
lifted up his hand toward the people and blessed them.</q></q><note place='foot'>Lev. ix.
22.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. When the High Priest desired to offer incense he went
up on the ascent to the altar, and the Sagan (Suffragan) was
on his right. When he reached the half of the ascent, the
Sagan took him by his right hand and helped him up. The
first (priest) reached to him the head and hind foot of the lamb,
and he laid his hand on them, and then pushed them away.
The second priest reached out to the first one the two fore-legs,
and he handed them to the High Priest, and he laid his
hands upon them, and then pushed them away; the second
priest was dismissed, and he departed, and so they reached
out to him all the members of the lamb, and he laid his hands
upon them and pushed them away; but when he desired, he
merely laid his hands on them, and others pushed them away.
He next came to make a circuit of the altar. <q>From what
place did he begin?</q> <q>From the southeastern corner, northeastern,
northwestern, southwestern.</q> They gave to him the
wine for libation. The Sagan stood by the corner of the altar
with the banners in his hand, and two priests stood by the
table of the fat with two silver trumpets in their hands: They
sounded a blast, they blew an alarm, and again they sounded
the trumpets. They came and took their position beside the
son of Arza.<note place='foot'>Who had charge of the channels from the altar.</note>
One stood on his right hand and one stood on
his left. The High Priest bowed down to make the libation,
and the Sagan waved the banners, and the son of Arza clanged
the cymbals, and the Levites intoned the chant. When they
came to a full stop, the trumpets sounded, and the people
bowed themselves. At every full stop there was a blast, and
at every blast there was bowing down. This is the order of
the daily offering for the service of the House of our God.
May it be His will to build it speedily in our days. Amen.
</p>

<p>
4. The chant which the Levites intoned in the sanctuary on
the first day of the week was, <q>The earth is the Lord's and
the fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein.</q><note place='foot'>Ps.
xxiv. 1.</note>
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>
On the second day they said, <q>Great is the Lord, and greatly
to be praised, in the city of our God, in the mountain of his
holiness.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. xlviii. 1.</note> On the third day they said, <q>God
standeth in the congregation of the mighty: He judgeth among the
gods.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. lxxxii. 1.</note> On the fourth day they said,
<q>O Lord God, to whom vengeance belongeth; O God, to whom vengeance belongeth,
show thyself.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. xciv.</note> On the fifth day they said,
<q>Sing aloud unto God our strength, make a joyful noise unto the God of
Jacob.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. lxxxi.</note> On the sixth day they said,
<q>The Lord reigneth, he is clothed with majesty,</q><note place='foot'>Ps.
xciii.</note> etc. On the Sabbath they said the chant
composed for the Sabbath day, the chant composed for the
future, for the day to come, when all will be rest and repose
for life everlasting.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>On Measurements</head>

<quote rend='display'>
Priests and Levites Guarding the Temple&mdash;Officer of the
Watch&mdash;Gates&mdash;Chambers&mdash;Keys&mdash;Manner
of Entering the House&mdash;Nicanor&mdash;Steps&mdash;Altar&mdash;Place
of Slaughter&mdash;The Laver&mdash;The Porch&mdash;The
Sanctuary&mdash;Repairing the Holy of Holies&mdash;Measurements&mdash;Judging
the Priesthood.
</quote>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='talmud_measurements_chap_i'/>
<head>Chapter I</head>

<p>
1. The priests guarded the sanctuary in three places, in the
House Abtinas,<note place='foot'>A famous maker of incense.</note> in the House
Nitzus,<note place='foot'>Sparkling.</note> and in the House
Moked;<note place='foot'>Burning. The watch at certain gates
seems to have been hereditary in certain families. Just as at the present
time the custody of Rachel's tomb is the privilege of a certain family in Jerusalem.
Each guard consisted of ten men, so that there were 210 Levites in
the twenty-one stations. The three more important places contained guards of
both Levites and Priests, thirty of each. There were therefore 240 Levites on
guard each night.</note> and the Levites in twenty-one places, five at the
five gates of the Mountain of the House, four at its four corners
inside, five at the five gates of the Court, four at its four
corners outside, and one in the chamber of the Offering, and
one in the chamber of the Vail, and one behind the House of
Atonement.
</p>

<p>
2. The Captain of the Mountain of the House went round
to every Watch in succession with torches flaming before him,
and to every guard who did not stand forth, the Captain said,
<q>Peace be to thee.</q> If it appeared that he slept, he beat him
with his staff; and he had permission to set fire to his cushion.<note place='foot'>He
rolled up his overcoat and laid it down for a cushion.</note>
And they said, <q>what is the voice in the Court?</q> <q>It is the
voice of the Levite being beaten, and his garments burned,
because he slept on his guard.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. xvi. 15.</note>
Rabbi Eliezer, the son of Jacob, said, <q>once they found the brother of my mother asleep,
and they burned his cushion.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. There were five gates to the Mountain of the House,
two Huldah gates in the south which served for going in
and out, Kipunus in the west served for going in and out;
Tadi<note place='foot'>Obscurity.</note> in the north
served for no (ordinary) purpose. Upon
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>
the east gate was portrayed the city Shushan. Through it
one could see the High Priest who burned the heifer, and all
his assistants going out to the Mount of Olives.
</p>

<p>
4. In the court were seven gates&mdash;three in the north, and
three in the south, and one in the east. That in the south
was called the gate of Flaming, the second after it, the gate
of Offering; the third after it the Water-gate. That in the
east was called the gate Nicanor. And this gate had two
chambers, one on the right, and one on the left; one the
chamber of Phineas, the vestment keeper, and the other the
chamber of the pancake maker.
</p>

<p>
5. And at the gate Nitzus on the north was a kind of cloister
with a room built over it, where the priests kept ward above,
and the Levites below; and it had a door into the Chel.<note place='foot'>Platform
or rampart.</note> Second to it was the gate of the offering. Third the House
Moked.
</p>

<p>
6. In the House Moked were four chambers opening as
small apartments into a saloon&mdash;two in the Holy place, and
two in the Unconsecrated place; and pointed rails separated
between the Holy and the Unconsecrated. And what was their
use? The southwest chamber was the chamber for offering.
The southeast was the chamber for the showbread. In the
northeast chamber the children of the Asmoneans deposited
the stones of the altar which the Greek Kings had defiled.<note place='foot'>1
Mac. ii. 25.</note> In the northwest chamber they descended to the house of
baptism.
</p>

<p>
7. To the House Moked were two doors; one open to the
Chel, and one open to the court. Said Rabbi Judah, <q>the
one open to the court had a wicket, through which they went
in to sweep the court.</q>
</p>

<p>
8. The House Moked was arched, and spacious, and surrounded
with stone divans, and the elders of the Courses slept
there with the keys of the court in their hands; and also the
young priests each with his pillow on the ground.
</p>

<p>
9. And there was a place a cubit square with a tablet of
marble, and to it was fastened a ring, and a chain upon which
the keys were suspended. When the time approached for
locking the gates, the priest lifted up the tablet by the ring,
and took the keys from the chain and locked inside, and the
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
Levites slept outside. When he had finished locking, he returned
the keys to the chain, and the tablet to its place, laid
his pillow over it, and fell asleep. If sudden defilement happened,
he rose and went out in the gallery that ran under the
arch, and candles flamed on either side, until he came to the
house of baptism. Rabbi Eleazar, the son of Jacob, says,
<q>in the gallery that went under the Chel, he passed out through
Tadi.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Our Beauty be upon Thee in Three Places.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II</head>

<p>
1. The Mountain of the House was 500 cubits square. The
largest space was on the south, the second on the east, the
third on the north, and the least westward. In the place
largest in measurement was held most service.
</p>

<p>
2. All who entered the Mountain of the House entered on
the right-hand side, and went round, and passed out on the
left: except to whomsoever an accident occurred, he turned
to the left. <q>Why do you go to the left?</q> <q>I am in mourning.</q>
<q>He that dwelleth in this House comfort thee.</q> <q>I
am excommunicate.</q> <q>He that dwelleth in this House put
in thy heart (repentance), and they shall receive thee.</q> The
words of Rabbi Meier. To him said Rabbi José, <q>thou hast
acted as though they had transgressed against him in judgment;
but, <q>may He that dwelleth in this House put it in thy
heart that thou hearken to the words of thy neighbors, and
they shall receive thee.</q></q>
</p>

<anchor id='talmud_measurements_chap_ii_3'/>
<p>
3. Inside of the (Mountain of the House) was a reticulated
wall, ten hand-breadths high; and in it were thirteen breaches,
broken down by the Greek kings. The (Jews) restored, and
fenced them, and decreed before them thirteen acts of obeisance.
Inside of it was the Chel, ten cubits broad, and twelve
steps were there. The height of each step was half a cubit,
and the breadth half a cubit. All the steps there were in height
half a cubit, and in breadth half a cubit, except those of the
porch. All the doors there were in height twenty cubits, and
in breadth ten cubits, except that of the porch. All the gateways
there had doors, except that of the porch. All the gates
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>
there had lintels, except Tadi; there two stones inclined one
upon the other. All the gates there were transformed into
gold, except the gate Nicanor,<note place='foot'>So called either because Nicanor, a
Pharisee, had the gate made in Alexandria, and though it was thrown overboard
from a ship in a storm, it yet came safe to land; or because Nicanor,
a Greek prince, was slain there in the time of the Asmoneans.</note>
because to it happened a wonder,
though some said <q>because its brass glittered like gold.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. And all the walls there were high, except the eastern
wall, that the priest who burned the heifer, might stand on
the top of the Mount of Olives, and look straight into the
door of the Sanctuary when he sprinkled the blood.
</p>

<p>
5. The Court of the women was 135 cubits in length, by
135 in breadth. And in its four corners were four chambers,
each forty cubits square, and they had no roofs; and so they
will be in future, as is said, <q>Then he brought me forth into
the utter court, and caused me to pass by the four corners of
the court; and, behold, in every corner of the court there was
a court.</q><note place='foot'>Ezek. xlvi. 2.</note>
In the four corners of the court there were courts
smoking, yet not smoking, since they were roofless. And
what was their use? The southeast one was the chamber of
the Nazarites, for there the Nazarites cooked their peace-offerings,
and polled their hair, and cast it under the pot. The
northeast was the chamber for the wood, and there the priests
with blemishes gathered out the worm-eaten wood. And
every stick in which a worm was found, was unlawful for the
altar. The northwest was the chamber for the lepers. The
southwest? Rabbi Eleazar, the son of Jacob, said, <q>I forget
for what it served.</q> Abashaul said, <q>there they put wine,
and oil.</q> It was called the chamber of the house of oil. And
it was open at first and surrounded with lattice-work, that the
women might see from above and the men from beneath, lest
they should be mixed. And fifteen steps corresponding to
the fifteen steps in the Psalms, ascended from it to the court
of Israel; upon them the Levites chanted. They were not
angular, but deflected like the half of a round threshing-floor.
</p>

<p>
6. And under the court of Israel were chambers open to
the court of the women. There the Levites deposited their
harps, and psalteries, and cymbals, and all instruments of
music. The court of Israel was 135 cubits long, and eleven
broad; and likewise the court of the priests was 135 cubits
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
long, and eleven broad. And pointed rails separated the
court of Israel from the court of the priests. Rabbi Eleazar,
the son of Jacob, said, <q>there was a step a cubit high, and a
dais placed over it. And in it were three steps each half a
cubit in height.</q> We find that the priests' court was two
and a half cubits higher than the court of Israel. The whole
court was 187 cubits in length, and 135 cubits in breadth, and
the thirteen places for bowing were there. Abajose, the son
of Chanan, said, <q>in front of the thirteen gates.</q> In the south
near to the west were the upper gate, the gate of flaming, the
gate of the first-born, the water gate. And why is it called
the water gate? Because through it they bring bottles of
water for pouring out during the feast of Tabernacles. Rabbi
Eleazar, the son of Jacob, said, <q>through it the water returned
out, and in future it will issue from under the threshold of the
house.</q> And there were opposite to them in the north, near
to the west, the gate of Jochania, the gate of the offering, the
gate of the women, the gate of music. And <q>why was it
called the gate of Jochania?</q> <q>Because through it Jochania
went out in his captivity.</q> In the east was the gate Nicanor,
and in it were two wickets, one on the right, and one on the
left, and two in the west which were nameless.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Our Beauty be upon Thee, O Mountain of the House.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III</head>

<p>
1. The altar was thirty-two cubits square. It ascended a
cubit and receded a cubit. This was the foundation. It remains
thirty cubits square. It ascended five cubits, and
receded one cubit. This is the circumference. It remains
twenty-eight cubits square. The place for the horns was a
cubit on each side. It remains twenty-six cubits square.
The place of the path for the feet of the priests was a cubit
on each side. The hearth remains twenty-four cubits square.
Rabbi José said, <q>at first it was only twenty-eight cubits
square.</q> It receded and ascended until the hearth remained
twenty cubits square; but when the children of the captivity
came up, they added to it four cubits on the north, and four
cubits on the west, like a gamma it is said; and the altar was
<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>
twelve cubits long by twelve broad, being a square. One
might say it was only <q>a square of twelve,</q><note place='foot'>Ezek.
xliii. 16.</note> as is said. Upon
its four sides we learn that it measured from the middle twelve
cubits to every side. And a line of red paint girdled it in
the midst to separate the blood sprinkled above from the blood
sprinkled below. And the foundation was a perfect walk
along on the north side; and all along on the west, but it
wanted in the south one cubit, and in the east one cubit.<note place='foot'>As this
corner would have been in the tribe of Judah, it was not added,
that the whole altar might remain in the tribe of Benjamin. Gen. xlix. 27.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. And in the southwestern corner were two holes as two
thin nostrils, that the blood poured upon the western and
southern foundation should run into them; and it commingled
in a canal and flowed out into the Kidron.
</p>

<p>
3. Below in the plaster in the same corner there was a place
a cubit square, with a marble tablet, and a ring fastened in it.
Through it they descended to the sewer and cleansed it. And
there was a sloping ascent<note place='foot'>This sloping ascent to the altar was
strewn with salt. This salt was brought from the mountain of Sodom at the
south of the Dead Sea. The salt was intended to keep the priests from slipping
and falling, which might easily happen, as they were obliged to minister
barefooted. The coldness of the pavement in winter, and eating so much
flesh of the sacrifices, brought various diseases on the priests.</note>
to the south of the altar, thirty-two
cubits long by sixteen broad. In its western side was a closet,
where they put the birds unmeet for the sin-offering.
</p>

<p>
4. Either the stones of the sloping ascent, or the stones
of the altar were from the valley of Bethcerem.<note place='foot'>House of the
vineyard.</note> And they digged deeper than virgin soil, and brought from thence perfect
stones over which iron<note place='foot'>Deut. xxvii. 5.</note> was not waved. For the
iron defiles by touching. And a scratch defiles everything. In
any of them a scratch defiled, but the others were lawful.
And they whitewashed them twice in the year; once at the
passover, and once at the feast of Tabernacles. And the
Sanctuary (was whitewashed) once at the passover. The
Rabbi said, <q>every Friday evening they whitewashed them
with a mop on account of the blood.</q> They did not plaster
it with an iron trowel, <q>mayhap it will touch and defile.</q>
Since iron is made to shorten the days of man, and the altar
is made to lengthen the days of man, it is not lawful, that
what shortens should be waved over what lengthens.
</p>

<p>
5. And there were rings to the northern side of the altar,
<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>
six rows of four each: though some say four rows of six each.
Upon them the priests slaughtered the holy beasts. The
slaughter-house was at the north side of the altar. And in
it were eight dwarf pillars with a beam of cedar-wood over
them. And in them were fastened iron hooks&mdash;three rows
to each pillar. Upon them they hung up (the bodies), and
skinned them upon marble tables between the pillars.
</p>

<p>
6. The laver was between the porch and the altar, but inclined
more to the south. Between the porch and the altar
were twenty-two cubits, and there were twelve steps. The
height of each step was half a cubit, and its breadth a cubit&mdash;a
cubit&mdash;a cubit&mdash;a landing three cubits&mdash;a cubit&mdash;a cubit and
a landing three cubits. And the upper one a cubit&mdash;a cubit,
and the landing four cubits. Rabbi Jehudah said, <q>the upper
one a cubit&mdash;a cubit, and the landing five cubits.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. The doorway of the porch was forty cubits high, and
twenty broad. Over it were five carved oak beams. The
lower one extended beyond the doorway a cubit on either
side. The one over it extended a cubit on either side. It
follows that the uppermost was thirty cubits; and between
each one there was a row of stones.
</p>

<p>
8. And stone buttresses were joined from the wall of the
sanctuary to the wall of the porch, lest it should bulge. And
in the roof of the porch were fastened golden chains, upon
which the young priests climbed up, and saw the crowns. As
it is said, <q>And the crowns shall be to Helem, and to Tobijah,
and to Jedaiah, and to Hen, the son of Zephaniah, for a
memorial in the temple of the Lord.</q><note place='foot'>Zech.
vi. 14.</note> And over the doorway
of the sanctuary was a golden vine supported upon the
buttresses. Everyone who vowed a leaf, or a berry, or a
cluster, he brought it and hung it upon it. Said Rabbi
Eleazar, the son of Zadok, <q>it is a fact, and there were numbered
300 priests to keep it bright.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Our Beauty be upon Thee, O Altar.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV</head>

<p>
1. The doorway of the Sanctuary<note place='foot'>The Rabbis say that <q>the world is
like an eye. The ocean is the white of the eye. The pupil is Jerusalem. And
the image in the pupil is the Sanctuary.</q></note> was twenty cubits in
height, and ten in breadth. And it had four doors, two within
and two without, as is said, <q>Two doors to the temple and
the holy place.</q><note place='foot'>Ezek. xli. 23.</note>
The outside (doors) opened into the doorway
to cover the thickness of the wall, and the inside doors
opened into the Sanctuary to cover (the space) behind the
doors, because the whole house was overlaid with gold excepting
behind the doors. Rabbi Judah said, <q>they stood in
the middle of the doorway, and like a pivot these folded behind
them two cubits and a half; and those two cubits and
a half, half a cubit and a jamb on this side, and half a cubit
and a jamb on the other side.</q> It is said, <q>two doors to two
doors folding back, two leaves to one door and two leaves to
the other.</q><note place='foot'>Ezek. xli. 24.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. And the great gate had two wickets, one in the north,
and one in the south. Through the one in the south no man
ever entered. And with regard to it Ezekiel declared, as is
said, <q>The Lord said unto me; this gate shall be shut, it shall
not be opened, and no man shall enter in by it; because the
Lord, the God of Israel, hath entered in by it, therefore it
shall be shut.</q><note place='foot'>Ezek. xliv. 2.</note>
The priest took the key, and opened the
wicket, and went into the little chamber, and from the chamber
to the Sanctuary. Rabbi Judah said, <q>he went in the
thickness of the wall, until he found himself standing between
the two gates, and he opened the outside gates from inside,
and the inside from outside.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. And there were thirty-eight little chambers, fifteen in
the north, fifteen in the south, and eight in the west. The
northern and southern ones were (placed) five over five, and
five over them; and in the west three over three, and two
over them. To each were three doors: one to the little
chamber on the right, one to the little chamber on the left,
and one to the little chamber over it. And in the northeastern
corner were five gates: one to the little chamber on
<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>
the right, and one to the little chamber over, and one to the
gallery, and one to the wicket, and one to the Sanctuary.
</p>

<p>
4. The lowest row was five cubits, and the roofing six
cubits, and the middle row six, and the roofing seven, and
the upper was seven, as is said, <q>the nethermost chamber was
five cubits broad, and the middle six cubits broad, and the
third seven cubits broad.</q><note place='foot'>1 Kings vi. 6.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. And a gallery ascended from the northeastern corner
to the southwestern corner. Through it they went up to the
roofs of the little chambers. One went up in the gallery with
his face to the west. So he proceeded all along the northern
side, till he reached the west. On reaching the west, he turned
his face southward, going along the west side, till he reached
the south. On reaching the south, with his face to the east,
he went along the south side till he arrived at the door of
the upper story, because the door of the upper story opened
in the south side. And at the door of the upper story were
two cedar beams. By them they went up to the roof of the
upper story, and on its summit rails separated between the
Holy and the Holy of Holies. And in the attic, trap-doors
opened to the Holy of Holies. Through them they let down
the workmen in boxes, lest they should feast their eyes in the
Holy of Holies.
</p>

<p>
6. The Sanctuary was a square of 100 cubits, and its height
100. The foundation six cubits, and the height (of the wall)
forty cubits, and the string course<note place='foot'>Curiously
graven and gilt.</note> one cubit, and the rain
channel two cubits, and the beams one cubit, and the covering
plaster one cubit; and the height of the upper story was
forty cubits, and the string course one cubit, and the rain
channel two cubits, and the beams one cubit, and the covering
plaster one cubit, and the battlement three cubits, and
the scarecrow one cubit. Rabbi Judah said, <q>the scarecrow
was not counted in the measurement; but the battlement was
four cubits.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. From east to west there were 100 cubits, the wall of the
porch five, and the porch eleven, and the wall of the Sanctuary
six, and the interior forty, and the partition space (between
the Vails) one, and the Holy of Holies twenty cubits. The
wall of the Sanctuary was six, and the little chamber six, and
<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>
the wall of the little chamber five. From north to south there
were seventy (cubits). The wall of the gallery five, the gallery
three, the wall of the little chamber five, the little chamber six,
the wall of the Sanctuary six, its interior twenty, the wall of
the Sanctuary six, the little chamber six, the wall of the little
chamber five, the place of the descent of the water three, and
the wall five cubits. The porch was extended beyond it fifteen
cubits in the north, and fifteen in the south; and this space
was called, <q>the house of the instruments of slaughter,</q> because
the knives were there deposited. And the Sanctuary
was narrow behind and broad in the front, and it was like a
lion, as is said, <q>Ho! Ariel, the city where David
dwelt,<note place='foot'>Is. xxix. 1.</note> as
a lion is narrow behind and broad in front, so the Sanctuary
is narrow behind and broad in front.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Our Beauty be upon Thee, Door of the Sanctuary.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V</head>

<p>
1. The length of the whole court<note place='foot'><q>The king only, and no man else
(remarks Maimonides) might sit in the court of the Temple in any place; and
even this privilege was confined to a king of the family of David.</q> Cunœus
further observes, that the king was esteemed nearer to God than the priests
themselves, and a greater president of religion.</note> was 187 cubits. The
breadth 135. From east to west 187. The place for the tread
of the feet of Israel was eleven cubits. The place for the
tread of the priests eleven cubits. The altar thirty-two. Between
the porch and the altar twenty-two cubits. The temple
100 cubits; and eleven cubits behind the House of Atonement.
</p>

<p>
2. From north to south there were 135 cubits. From the
sloping ascent to the altar sixty-two. From the altar to the
rings eight cubits. The space for the rings twenty-four.
From the rings to the tables four. From the tables to the
pillars four. From the pillars to the wall of the court eight
cubits. And the remainder lay between the sloping ascent
and the wall and the place of the pillars.
</p>

<p>
3. In the court were six chambers, three in the north, and
three in the south. In the north, the chamber of salt, the
chamber of parva, the chamber of washers. In the chamber
of salt they added salt to the offerings. In the chamber of
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
parva they salted the skins of the offerings; and upon its roof
was the house of baptism for the High Priest on the day of
atonement. In the chamber of washers they cleansed the inwards
of the offerings; and from thence a gallery extended up
to the top of the house of parva.
</p>

<p>
4. In the south were the chamber of wood, the chamber of
the captivity, and the chamber of hewn stone. The chamber
of wood, said Rabbi Eleazar, the son of Jacob, <q>I forget for
what it served.</q> Abashaul said, <q>the chamber of the High
Priest was behind them both, and the roof of the three chambers
was even. In the chamber of the captivity was sunk the
well with the wheel attached to it, and from thence water was
supplied to the whole court. In the chamber of Hewn Stone
the great Sanhedrin of Israel sat, and judged the priesthood,
and the priest in whom defilement was discovered, clothed
in black, and vailed in black, went out and departed; and when
no defilement was found in him, clothed in white, and vailed
in white, he went in and served with his brethren the priests.
And they made a feast-day, because no defilement was found
in the seed of Aaron the Priest, and thus they said, <q>Blessed
be the Place. Blessed be He, since no defilement is found
in the seed of Aaron. And blessed be He who has chosen
Aaron and his sons to stand and minister<note place='foot'>The
Temple services were arranged by the council of fourteen. This council
was composed of the High Priest, the Sagan (the deputy or Suffragan of
the High Priest), two Katholikin, who had charge of the treasuries, three Gizbarim,
who were assistants of the Katholikin, and seven Ammarcalin, who had
charge of the gates.</note> before the Lord
in the House of the Holy of Holies.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Our Beauty be upon Thee, whole Court;<lb/>
And Completion to Thee, Tract</hi><lb/>
MEASUREMENTS.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Tabernacle</head>

<quote rend='display'>
Heave-offerings&mdash;Dimensions of the Tabernacle&mdash;Boards&mdash;Bars&mdash;Rings
of Gold&mdash;Overlaying with Gold&mdash;Pipes of
Gold&mdash;Curtains&mdash;Threads&mdash;Coupling&mdash;Taches&mdash;Sockets&mdash;Vail&mdash;Holy
of Holies&mdash;Holy Place&mdash;Sacred
Vessels&mdash;Cunning Work&mdash;Court&mdash;Bars&mdash;Pins&mdash;Hangings&mdash;The
Ark&mdash;The Tables of the Law both Whole and Broken&mdash;The
Staves&mdash;The Table of Showbread&mdash;The Candlestick&mdash;Indefinite
Expressions&mdash;The
Altar of Incense&mdash;The Altar of Burnt-offerings&mdash;The
Line for the Sprinkling of Blood&mdash;The
Laver&mdash;Guards&mdash;Encampment&mdash;Standards&mdash;Preparations&mdash;Blowing
the Trumpet&mdash;The March&mdash;Signs
for Encamping&mdash;The Pillar of Cloud&mdash;The Shechinah.
</quote>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I</head>

<p>
Rabbi Judah the Holy, said, there were ten heave-offerings,
the heave-offering of the Lord, and the heave-offering
of the tithes, of the dough, and of the first-fruits; and the
heave-offering of the Nazarite, and the heave-offering of
thanksgiving, and the heave-offering of the land, and the
heave-offering of Israelites dwelling in Midian, and the
heave-offering of the shekels, and the heave-offering of the
tabernacle. The heave-offering of the Lord, and the heave-offering
of the tithes, and of the dough, and of the first-fruits,
and the heave-offering of the Nazarite, and the heave-offering
of thanksgiving, were for the priests. The heave-offering of
the land was for the priests, the Levites, and the Nethinim,<note place='foot'>The
Nethinim, or the <q>given ones,</q> were added, it is supposed, from among
the Gibeonites to fill up the deficiencies in the number of Levites who returned
from the captivity in Babylon. They were held in low estimation, and were
forbidden to intermarry with Israelites.</note>
and the Sanctuary and Jerusalem. The heave-offering of
Midian was for Eleazar the priest, the heave-offering of shekels
was for the sockets of the tabernacle, the heave-offering of
the tabernacle furnished the material of the tabernacle, and
the oil for lighting, and the sweet incense, and the garments
of the priests, and the garments of the High Priest. The
length of the tabernacle was thirty cubits, and its breadth was
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
ten cubits, and its height was ten cubits. Rabbi José said,
<q>its length was thirty-one cubits.</q> <q>How was the tabernacle
set up?</q> <q>Forty sockets of silver were placed on the north,
and forty sockets of silver on the south, and sixteen on the
west, and four on the east. These are 100 sockets. As is
said,<note place='foot'>Exod. xxxviii. 27.</note> <q>An
hundred sockets of the hundred talents, a talent
for a socket.</q></q> <q>How were the boards set up?</q> <q>Twenty
boards were placed on the north, and twenty boards on the
south, and eight on the west. On the east there was no board,
but there were four pillars of shittim-wood. Upon them the
vail was hung. As is said,<note place='foot'>Exod. xxvi. 31-33.</note>
<q>thou shalt make a vail,</q> etc., <q>and
thou shalt hang it upon four pillars of shittim-wood, overlaid
with gold,</q> etc., and <q>thou shalt hang up the vail under the
taches.</q></q> And the sockets were made with holes, and these
were cut out in the boards below, a quarter from one side and
a quarter from the other side, and there was cut out half of it
in the middle, and it made two pins like two supports, and
they entered into two sockets, as is said, <q>two sockets under
one board for its two tenons.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxvi.
19.</note> The pins extended from the
boards two and two, to every one which was inserted, the
positive into the negative, as it is said,<note place='foot'>Exod.
xxvi. 17.</note> <q>Set in order one
against the other.</q> The words of Rabbi Nehemiah, when
Rabbi Nehemiah said, <q>there is no meaning in saying, <q>set
in order.</q></q> <q>And what is meant by set in order?</q> <q>It is
meant that there should be made for them rungs like an
Egyptian ladder.</q> There was cut out from the board above
a finger-breadth from one side, and a finger-breadth from the
other side, and they were put into the golden ring, that they
should not separate one from the other, as is said, <q>And they
shall be coupled together beneath, and they shall be coupled
together above the head of it unto one ring.</q><note place='foot'>Exod.
xvi. 24</note> There is no
meaning in saying, <q>unto one ring,</q> and what is meant by
saying, <q>unto one ring?</q> <q>The place where the bar was
put in, and every board had in it two rings of gold, one above,
and one below; in them were put in the bars.</q> And there
were two upper bars, and two lower (bars) on the south side;
the length of each of them was fifteen cubits. It follows that
two were in length thirty cubits against twenty boards, and
<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>
the middle (bar) was in length thirty cubits against twenty
boards, which was inserted in the middle of the boards from
east to west, as is said, <q>And the middle bar in the midst of
the boards shall reach from end to end.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxvi. 28.</note>
As the boards were made in the south, so the boards were made in the north,
but in the west they were not so; but the length of the upper
bar and the lower one was six cubits against four boards, and
the middle (bar), twelve cubits against eight boards. And
the boards, and the bars, and the pillars, and the sockets, the
place of the thickness of the boards were overlaid with gold,
as is said, <q>And the boards thou shalt overlay with
gold.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxvi. 29.</note>
<q>The places for the bars,</q> there is no meaning in saying,
<q>places for the bars</q>; and what is the meaning of saying,
<q>places for the bars</q>? <q>The place where the bar entered
the boards.</q> <q>And the bars themselves shall be overlaid with
gold.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxvi. 29.</note>
<q>How was it done?</q> <q>Two pipes of gold were
introduced&mdash;the length of each of them was a cubit and a half;
and they were put into the hole of the board, the place where
the bars were put in.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II</head>

<p>
<q>How was the tabernacle covered?</q> <q>There were provided
ten curtains of blue, of purple, and scarlet, and fine-twined
linen.</q> As is said, <q>Moreover, thou shalt make the
tabernacle (with) ten curtains of fine-twined linen, and blue,
and purple, and scarlet.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxvi. 1.</note>
<q>Their threads were doubled thirty-two times,</q> the words of
Rabbi Nehemiah, when R. Nehemiah said, <q>thread,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,
one doubled in two, <q>twined,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, to four,
<q>fine-twined,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, to eight. It follows that their
threads were doubled thirty-two times. But the Sages say,
<q>thread,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, one doubled in two, <q>twined,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, to three, <q>fine-twined,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,
to six. It follows that their threads were
doubled twenty-four times. They were coupled in two vails,
one of five, and one of five.<note place='foot'>Exod. xxvi. 3.</note>
As is said, <q>the five curtains
shall be coupled together one to another: and (other) five curtains
(shall be) coupled one to another,</q> and they were coupled
with loops of blue, as is said,<note place='foot'>Exod. xxvi. 4.</note>
<q>And thou shalt make loops
<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>
of blue upon the edge of the one curtain from the selvedge
in the coupling; and likewise shalt thou make in the uttermost
edge of (another) curtain, in the coupling of the second.</q>
And they were coupled to fifty taches of gold, as is
said,<note place='foot'>Exod. xxvi. 6.</note> <q>And
thou shalt make fifty taches of gold, and couple the curtains
together with the taches; and it shall be one tabernacle.</q> And
the taches appeared in the tabernacle as stars in the firmament.
The length of the curtains was twenty-eight cubits, as is
said,<note place='foot'>Exod. xxvi. 2.</note>
<q>the length of one curtain (shall be) eight and twenty cubits.</q>
Take from them ten cubits for the breadth of the tabernacle,
there will remain nine cubits from the one side, and nine
cubits from the other side. They hung down and covered the
boards till they reached the sockets. This teaches that the
sockets were one cubit high. And the breadth of the curtains
was forty cubits. As is said,<note place='foot'>Exod. xxvi. 2.</note>
<q>and the breadth of one curtain
four cubits.</q> Take from them thirty cubits from the east to
the west, which were on the roof of the tabernacle, and ten
cubits to the west behind the tabernacle, there are forty.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III</head>

<p>
There were provided eleven curtains of goats' hair, and the
length of every one of them was thirty cubits, as is said, <q>And
thou shalt make curtains of goats' (hair) to be a covering upon
the tabernacle: eleven curtains shalt thou make. The length
of one curtain (shall be) thirty cubits.</q><note place='foot'>Exod.
xxvi. 7, 8.</note> And they were
coupled in two vails, one of five, and one of six, as is said,
<q>And thou shalt couple five curtains by themselves, and six
curtains by themselves,</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxvi. 9.</note>
and they were coupled with fifty
loops, as is said, <q>And he made fifty loops upon the outmost
edge of the curtain in the coupling, and fifty loops made he
upon the edge of the curtain which coupleth the
second.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxxvi. 17.</note>
And the loops were coupled to fifty taches of brass, as is said,
<q>And thou shalt make fifty taches of brass, and put the taches
into the loops, and couple the tent together that it may be
one.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxvi. 11.</note>
The length of the curtains was thirty cubits. Take
from them ten cubits for their breadth, there will remain ten
<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>
cubits from one side, and ten cubits from the other side, as
they hung down and covered the boards and the sockets. The
breadth of the curtains was forty-four cubits, as is said, <q>And
the breadth of one curtain four cubits; and the eleven curtains
shall be all of one measure.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxvi.
8.</note> Take from them thirty cubits
for the length of the tabernacle, and ten cubits behind the
tabernacle&mdash;these are forty. There was left there one curtain
which was doubled in front of the tent, as is said, <q>And thou
shalt double the sixth curtain in the fore-front of the
tabernacle.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxvi. 9.</note>
Rabbi Judah said, <q>half of it was doubled in the
fore-front of the tabernacle, and half of it was hanging behind
the tabernacle,</q> as is said, <q>And the remnant that remaineth
of the curtains of the tent, the half curtain that remaineth shall
hang over the back-side of the tabernacle.</q><note place='foot'>Exod.
xxvi. 12.</note> There was also
provided one great cover of rams' skins dyed red, its length
thirty cubits, and its breadth ten cubits; with it they clothed
the tent upon the tabernacle from east to west, as is said, <q>And
thou shalt make a covering for the tent of rams' skins dyed
red, and a covering above of badgers' skins,</q><note place='foot'>Some
commentators explain these to be <q>skins of seals</q> or <q>dolphins,</q> and
others understand the meaning to be a <q>blue color.</q> Exod. xxvi.
14.</note> and it was
made <q>like patchwork,</q> the words of Rabbi Nehemiah.
Rabbi Judah said, <q>there were two covers&mdash;the lower one of
rams' skins dyed red, and the upper one of badgers' skins,</q>
as is said, <q>his covering and the covering of the badgers' skins
that is above upon it.</q><note place='foot'>Num. iv. 25.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV</head>

<p>
The vail was woven ten cubits square, and there were made
in it four loops, and it was hung on hooks on the tops of the
pillars, and it was spread in the third portion of the tabernacle,
that there should be from it inward ten cubits, and from
it outward twenty cubits, as is said, <q>And thou shalt hang up
the vail under the taches.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxvi. 33.</note>
It follows that the place of the
Holy of Holies was ten cubits square, and there were put
the ark, and the pot of manna, and the pan of anointing oil,
and Aaron's rod with its almonds and flowers; and there Aaron
entered four times on the day of atonement. Outside the vail
<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>
were placed the table and candlestick. But the table was on
the north, and opposite to it was the candlestick on the south;
as is said, <q>And thou shalt set the table without the vail, and
the candlestick over against the table.</q><note place='foot'>Exod.
xxvi. 35.</note> And as they were placed in the tent of the
congregation, so were they placed in the everlasting
House.<note place='foot'>Or, in the <q>House of dispensations.</q></note> Now
the tent of the congregation was in length thirty cubits, and in breadth ten cubits.
But the everlasting House was in length sixty cubits, and in breadth
twenty cubits. This teaches that the tent of the congregation
was one-fourth part of the everlasting House. And as the vail
was woven, so was woven the ephod and the breastplate, only
in these there was an additional thread of gold; as is said,
<q>And they did beat the gold into thin plates and cut <emph>it into</emph>
wires.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxxix. 3.</note> As was the weaving of the covering
vail, so was the weaving of the covering for the entrance. But the vail was
cunning work, as is said, <q>Thou shalt make the vail of blue
and purple,</q> etc.; <q>cunning work.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxvi. 31.</note> But
the covering of the entrance was needle-work, as is said, <q>And thou shalt
make an hanging for the door of the tent,</q> etc., <q>of
needle-work.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxvi. 36.</note>
The words of R. Nehemiah. R. Nehemiah usually
said, <q>every place where it is said cunning work (there were)
two figures&mdash;in the needlework (there was) but one figure
only.</q> And the branches of the candlestick were right opposite
to the breadth of the table. And the golden altar was
placed in the middle of the house, and divided the house, and
its half inward was right opposite to the ark; as is said, <q>And
thou shalt put it before the vail that is by the ark of the testimony
before the mercy-seat.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxx. 6.</note> From the boards on the
south to the branches of the candlestick (there were) two cubits and
a half. And from the branches of the candlestick to the table
(there were) five cubits. And from the table to the boards
on the north (were) two cubits and a half. This teaches that
the breadth of the Holy Place (was) ten cubits. From the
boards on the west to the vail (were) ten cubits. From the
vail to the table were five cubits. From the table to the golden
altar (were) five cubits. From the golden altar to the boards
on the east (were) ten cubits. This teaches that the length
of the tabernacle was thirty cubits.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V</head>

<p>
The court of the tabernacle was in length 100 cubits, and
in breadth fifty cubits, as is said, <q>And thou shalt make the
court of the tabernacle for the south side, etc., 100 cubits,<note place='foot'>Exod.
xxvii. 9.</note> and likewise for the north side an hundred cubits,</q> as is said,
<q>and likewise for the north side in length there shall be hangings
of 100 cubits long.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxvii. 11.</note> And on the west fifty
cubits, as is said, <q>On the west side shall be hangings of fifty
cubits.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxvii. 12.</note> And
on the east fifty cubits, as is said, <q>On the east side eastward
<emph>shall be</emph> fifty cubits.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxvii. 13.</note> Take
from them fifty cubits for hangings, as is said, <q>The hangings of one side of the gate
shall be fifteen cubits,</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxxviii. 14, 15.</note> etc. <q>And
for the other side,</q> etc. From both sides the hangings on the south to the tent were
twenty cubits, and the tent was ten cubits broad, and from the tent
to the hangings on the north were twenty cubits. This teaches
that the breadth (of the court) was fifty cubits. From the
hangings on the west to the tent were twenty cubits, and the
tent was thirty cubits long; and from the tent to the hangings
on the east, there were fifty cubits. This teaches that its length
was 100 cubits, as is said, <q>The length of the court shall be
100 cubits, and the breadth fifty everywhere.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxvii.
18.</note> Rabbi José said there is no meaning in saying <q>fifty everywhere,</q> and
what is meant by saying <q>fifty everywhere</q>? <q>That is in
front of the tent.</q> This teaches that its length was 100 cubits,
and its breadth fifty cubits. But you could not know the
breadth of the hangings till you know the height of the court,
as he (Moses) said, <q>And the height five cubits</q>;<note place='foot'>Exod. xxvii.
18.</note> as the height was five cubits, so was the breadth five cubits. <q>How
was the court set up?</q> Twenty sockets of brass were put
on the north side, and twenty on the south side, and there
was a pillar in every one of them. And there were beams, and
a ring was fastened in their middle, and the beams were fastened
with ropes and pillars; and the length of every beam was six
hand-breadths, and its breadth was three (hand-breadths).
And the ring was hung on the hook in the pillar; and the
hanging was rolled on it like the sail of a ship. It follows
that the hanging extended from the pillar two cubits and a
<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>
half on one side, and two cubits and a half on the other side;
and so with the second pillar. This teaches that between each
pillar there were five cubits. The beams were coupled with
ropes and pillars, and they were coupled in the pins of brass;
and as there were pins to the tabernacle, so were there pins
to the court, as is said, <q>All the vessels of the tabernacle in
all the service thereof, and all the pins thereof, and all the pins
of the court, shall be of brass.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxvii. 19.</note> But you
could not know how much space there was from the hangings to the entrance
of the court, till he said, <q>And the hangings of the court, and
the hanging for the door of the gate of the court, which is by
the tabernacle, and by the altar.</q><note place='foot'>Num. iv.
26.</note> As between the tabernacle
and the altar there were ten cubits, so from the hangings to
the entrance of the court there were ten cubits. But you
could not know how high was the entrance of the court, till
he said, <q>And for the gate of the court shall be a hanging
of twenty cubits,</q> in length and height. In breadth it was
five cubits. <q>There was no meaning in saying five cubits,
and what is the meaning of saying five cubits?</q> <q>To instruct
thee that its length was ten cubits, and its breadth five
cubits.</q> As was the entrance of the tent, so was the entrance
of the court. As was the entrance of the court, so was the
entrance of the sanctuary. As was the height of the entrance
of the sanctuary, so was the breadth of the entrance of the
porch. <q>The length of the court shall be 100 cubits, and the
breadth of it fifty everywhere.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxvii. 18.</note> The oral
law says, <q>Take fifty and surround them with fifty.</q><note place='foot'>Some explain
this to mean <q>multiply fifty with 100</q> (Aruch); others think that the measurement
is to be made with a rope of fifty cubits (Eruvin).</note> Hence said Rabbi José,
the son of Rabbi Judah,<note place='foot'>Some read <q>in the name of,</q> etc.</note>
<q>an enclosed space which can contain
two seahs (of sown grain) as the court of the tabernacle,
is lawful for carrying burdens on the Sabbath day.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI</head>

<p>
The ark which Moses made in the desert was in length
two cubits and a half, and in breadth one cubit and a half,
and in height one cubit and a half, as is said, <q>And they shall
make an ark of shittim-wood, two cubits and a half shall be
<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>
the length thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth thereof,
and a cubit and a half the height thereof.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxv. 10.</note>
R. Meier said, <q>with a cubit containing six hand-breadths&mdash;thus they make
fifteen hand-breadths. Take from them twelve hand-breadths
for the breadth of the tables, and two hand-breadths for the
place where the roll of the Law lay, and half a hand-breadth
from either side for the thickness of the ark. And the breadth
of the ark was nine hand-breadths. Take from them six hand-breadths
for the length of the tables, and for the place where
the roll of the Law lay, two hand-breadths, that it should not
be pressed going in and out, and half a hand-breadth on either
side for the thickness of the ark.</q> R. Judah said, <q>with a
cubit containing five hand-breadths, thus there were twelve
hand-breadths and a half, and four tables lay in it&mdash;two perfect,
and two broken. And the length of each table was six hand-breadths,
and their breadth six, and their thickness three.
Take from them twelve hand-breadths for the breadth of the
tables, and a finger-breadth on either side for the thickness
of the ark.</q> And the breadth of the ark was seven hand-breadths
and a half. Take from them six hand-breadths for
the length of the tables, and one hand-breadth for the place
where the handles (pillars) lay; and on it the explanation of
the prophets is, <q>King Solomon made himself a chariot of the
wood of Lebanon. He made the pillars thereof of silver.</q><note place='foot'>Sol. Song,
iii. 9, 10.</note> And (there was) a finger-breadth on either side for the thickness
of the ark, but the roll of the Law was put on the side,
as is said, <q>And put it in the side of the ark of the covenant
of the LORD.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. xxxi. 26.</note> And so with the Philistines,
he said, <q>And put the jewels of gold, which ye return for a trespass-offering,
in a coffer by the side thereof.</q><note place='foot'>1 Sam. vi. 8.</note> R. Judah,
the son of Lachish, said, <q>there were two arks, one which abode in the encampment,
and one which went forth with them to war, and in
it were the broken tables,</q> as is said, <q>And the ark of the
covenant of the Lord went.</q><note place='foot'>Num. x. 33.</note> But the one with
them in the encampment contained the roll of the Law. That is what is
written, <q>Nevertheless the ark of the covenant of the Lord;
and Moses departed not out of the camp.</q><note place='foot'>Num. xiv. 44.</note> And
so he said with regard to Saul, <q>And Saul said unto Ahiah, bring hither
<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>
the ark of God.</q><note place='foot'>1 Sam. xiv. 18.</note> And so of Uriah it is said,
<q>The ark, and Israel, and Judah abide in tents.</q><note place='foot'>2 Sam. xi.
11.</note> But the ark of the covenant went not forth to war, save once only, as is
said, <q>So the people sent to Shiloh, that they might bring from thence
the ark of the covenant of the Lord of hosts.</q><note place='foot'>1 Sam. iv. 4.</note>
R. Judah said, <q>there was nothing in the ark save the tables of the covenant
only,</q> as is said, <q>There was nothing in the ark save the
two tables of stone.</q><note place='foot'>1 Kings viii. 9.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VII</head>

<p>
<q>How did Bezaleel make the ark?</q> <q>He made three
boxes, two of gold and one of wood. He put the wooden
one inside the golden one, and the golden one inside the
wooden one, and covered the upper edge with gold; as is
said, <q>And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold: within and
without shalt thou overlay it.</q></q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxv. 11.</note> <q>And
what is the meaning of saying, <q>thou shalt overlay it</q>?</q> <q>It means that he
covered the upper edges (with) gold.</q> The golden mercy-seat
was placed above upon it; as is said, <q>And thou shalt put the
mercy-seat above upon the ark.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxv. 21.</note> And four
rings of gold were fastened in it, two on the north and two on the south,
and in them the staves were put, and they were never moved
from thence; as is said, <q>The staves shall be in the rings of
the ark; they shall not be taken from it.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxv. 15.</note>
Even though Solomon made the pattern of all the vessels, the pattern of
the ark he did not make; as is said, <q>And all the elders of
Israel came, and the priests took up the ark.</q><note place='foot'>1 Kings viii.
3.</note> The ark was placed in the midst of the House, and divided the House ten
cubits by ten cubits. And two cherubs of gold stood on their
feet on the ground. From the wall to the cherub there were
five cubits, and from the cherub to the wall five cubits.
<q>Where is it mentioned, that as soon as the priests brought
in the ark the staves were drawn out, and they reached to the
vail, and they touched the entrance?</q> As is said, <q>And they
drew out the staves, that the ends of the staves were seen out in
the holy place before the oracle.</q><note place='foot'>1 Kings viii. 8.</note> For that
reason the doors of the Holy of Holies were never closed. <q>And they were
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>
not seen without.</q><note place='foot'>1 Kings viii. 8.</note> It is not possible to
say that they were not seen, since it was already said <q>they were seen.</q> Neither
is it possible to say that they were seen, since it is already said
<q>they were not seen.</q> <q>How is it?</q> <q>They were pushing
out in the vail, and were seen in the sanctuary like the two
paps of a woman.</q> <q>And from whence (do we know) that
they were drawn out from the inside?</q> As is said, <q>And
they were not seen without.</q> There we learned that they were
drawn out from the inside. And from thence (we learned)
that they were drawn out to the outside, as is said, <q>And the
ends of the staves were seen.</q> And where thou sayest that as
the staves were drawn out, so were drawn out the wings of
the cherubim, and they covered the ark, and overshadowed
the house from above, as is said, <q>And the cherubims covered
the ark and the staves thereof, above.</q><note place='foot'>1 Kings viii. 7, 8.</note>
<q>And where was the ark concealed?</q> Rabbi Judah, the son of Lachish, said,
<q>in its place in the house of the Holy of Holies, as is said, <q>And
there they are unto this day.</q></q><note place='foot'>1 Kings viii. 8.</note> But the
Sages say, <q>in the chamber of the wood.</q> <q>And who concealed it?</q> Rabbi
Judah the Holy said, Josiah concealed it, as it is said, <q>And
said unto the Levites that taught all Israel, which were holy
unto the Lord, Put the holy ark in the house which Solomon,
the son of David, King of Israel, did build; it shall not be a
burden upon your shoulders.</q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. xxxv. 3.</note> He said to
them, <q>it shall not be carried captive with you to Babylon, that you should
bear it upon your shoulders.</q> Rabbi Eleazar said, <q>it went
to Babylon, as is said, <q>Nothing shall be left saith the
Lord,</q><note place='foot'>2 Kings xx. 17.</note>
nothing, not even the words in it.</q> The house of the Holy
of Holies, which Solomon made for it, had a wall, entrance,
and doors, as is said, <q>And the temple and the sanctuary had
two doors.</q><note place='foot'>Ezek. xli. 23.</note> But in the latter house there was
no wall, only two boards were there, and the length of each one was a cubit
and a half. And two vails of gold were there, spread over
them from above, and it was called the place of Partition.<note place='foot'>Some
commentators interpret <q>Traksin</q> to mean <q>place of doubting,</q>
as zealots continually disputed the exact division between the Holy Place
and the Holy of Holies.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VIII</head>

<p>
The table which Moses made in the wilderness was
in length two cubits, and its breadth one cubit, and its height
was one cubit and a half, as is said, <q>Thou shalt also make
a table of shittim-wood, two cubits shall be the length thereof,
and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the
height thereof.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxv. 23.</note> Rabbi Judah said, <q>the
cubit (contained) five hand-breadths, thus there are ten hand-breadths.</q> From
thence the Sages said, <q>the table was in length ten hand-breadths,
and in breadth five hand-breadths. And the showbread
was in length ten hand-breadths, and in breadth five.
The length of the showbread was placed against the breadth
of the table. It extended over two hand-breadths and a half
on either side. It follows that its length quite filled the breadth
of the table.</q> Rabbi Meier said, <q>the table was in length
twelve hand-breadths, and in breadth six hand-breadths. And
the showbread was in length ten (hand-breadths), and in
breadth five. And its length was placed against the breadth
of the table. It extended over two hand-breadths on either
side; and there was an opening of two hand-breadths in the
middle, that the air might blow through them (the loaves).</q>
Aba Shaul said, <q>they put there two cups of incense of the
showbread.</q> The Sages said to him, <q>and is it not already
said, <q>And thou shalt put pure frankincense upon each
row</q>?</q><note place='foot'>Lev. xxiv. 7.</note>
He replied to them, <q>and is it not already said, <q>And by him
shall be the tribe of Manasseh</q>?</q><note place='foot'>Num. ii. 20. The Hebrew letters
Ayin and Lamed therefore means <q>by</q> or <q>next,</q> as well as <q>upon.</q></note>
Although Solomon made ten tables, and all of them were lawful for service, as is said,
<q>He made also ten tables, and placed them in the temple, five
on the right side, and five on the left.</q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. iv. 8.</note>
<q>If thou sayest five on the south, and five on the north, is not a table on the south
worthless?</q> But what is the meaning of saying, <q>five on
the right and five on the left</q>? <q>Five to the right of the
table of Moses, and five to the left of the table of Moses, even
though he did not arrange the showbread, save for the table
of Moses only, as is said, <q>And the table whereupon the showbread
was.</q></q><note place='foot'>1 Kings vii. 48.</note> Rabbi José, the son of Rabbi
Judah, said,
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>
<q>all the tables were arranged for showbread as is said, <q>And the tables
whereon the showbread was set.</q></q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. iv. 19.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IX</head>

<p>
The candlestick which Moses made in the wilderness
was wrought from gold, and required hammering, and
required knops and flowers, as is said, <q>And thou shalt make
a candlestick of pure gold; of beaten work shall the candlestick
be made: his shaft and his branches, his bowls, his knops,
and his flowers, shall be of the same.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxv. 31.</note> <q>Do
I hear that he shall make separate members and join them to it?</q> <q>The
teaching says, that <q>they shall be of the same.</q></q> <q>Whence
know we that it extends to the light?</q> <q>The teaching says,
<q>Thou shalt make.</q></q> <q>I am of opinion that it should be
extended to the bowls, knops, and flowers. The teaching
says <q>it,</q> and what dost thou see to extend it to the light, and
withhold it from the bowls, the knops, and the flowers?</q>
<q>Because the verse extends and withholds, (therefore) I extend
(it to) the lights that they should be made with it, and I
withhold the bowls, the knops, and the flowers, that they
should not be made with it.</q> <q>Whence know we to extend
(it to) the tongs and snuff-dishes?</q> <q>The teaching says,
<q>thou shalt make.</q></q> <q>I am of opinion to extend (it to) the
snuffers, and the tweezers.</q> <q>The teaching says, <q>it,</q> and
what dost thou see to extend (it to) the tongs and snuff-dishes,
and to withhold (it from) the snuffers?</q> <q>Because the verse
extends and withholds. I extend (it to) the tongs and snuff-dishes,
since they are used with it. And I withhold (it from)
the snuffers and tweezers, since they are not used with it.</q>
As it was made of gold, it required hammering; when it was
not of gold it did not require hammering. When it was made
of gold it required bowls, knops, and flowers; when it was
not of gold it did not require bowls, knops, and flowers. When
it was made of gold it required a talent; when it was not of
gold it did not require a talent. Rabbi Joshua, the son of
Korcha, said, <q>it (the candlestick) was made of a talent, but
the lights, and the tongs, and the snuff-dishes, were not from
the talent,</q> as is said, <q>Of a talent of pure gold shall he make
<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>
it.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxv. 39.</note> <q>And what do I establish?</q> <q>That
all these vessels were vessels of pure gold. But the trumpets which Moses
made in the wilderness were made of silver only, as is said,
<q>Make thee two trumpets of silver.</q></q><note place='foot'>Num. x. 2.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter X</head>

<p>
<q>How did Bezaleel make the candlestick?</q> <q>He made
it from an ingot of gold, and it was like a beam. And above
and below he made bowls, knops, and flowers, and drew out
from it two branches, one on either side, and from it he drew
out two other branches, one on either side, and again drew
out two branches, one on either side, as is said, <q>And six
branches shall come out of the sides of it.</q></q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxv.
32.</note> But we could not understand the hammering of the bowls, until it be said,
<q>And in the candlesticks shall be four bowls made like unto
almonds with their knops and their flowers.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxv. 34.</note>
Aisi, the son of Judah, said, <q>there are five expressions in the Law, and
they have no fixed meaning. These are they, <q>accepted,</q><note place='foot'>Gen. iv.
7.</note> <q>cursed,</q><note place='foot'>Gen. xlix. 7.</note>
<q>to-morrow,</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xvii. 9.</note> <q>made like unto
almonds,</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxv. 34.</note> <q>and will rise
up.</q></q><note place='foot'>Deut. xxxi. 16.</note> <q>If thou doest well, shalt thou
not be accepted?</q> or, <q>thou shalt be accepted even if thou doest not
well.</q> <q>Cursed be their anger for it was fierce,</q> or, <q>for in
their anger they slew a man, and in their self-will they houghed
cursed oxen.</q> <q>To-morrow I will stand</q> or <q>go out, fight
with Amalek to-morrow.</q> <q>Made like unto almonds with
their knops, and their flowers,</q> or <q>four bowls made like unto
almonds.</q> <q>And this people will rise up,</q> or, <q>thou shalt
sleep with thy fathers, and thou shalt rise up.</q> These are the
five expressions in the Law which have no fixed meaning.
Aisa, the son of Akiba, said, <q>it happened once to be more
(than a talent by) a dinar of gold, and it was brought into the
crucible eighty times.</q> The body of the candlestick was
eighteen hand-breadths, the feet and the flowers were three
hand-breadths, and two hand-breadths were smooth, and one
hand-breadth was for the bowl, a knop and a flower, and two
hand-breadths were smooth, and one hand-breadth a knop,
and two branches proceeded from it, one on either side. And
<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>
two hand-breadths were smooth, and one hand-breadth a knop,
and two branches proceeded from it, one on either side, and
two hand-breadths were smooth, and one hand-breadth a
knop, and two branches proceeded from it on either side.
There remained three hand-breadths, in which were the bowls,
the knops, and the flowers, as is said, <q>Three bowls made like
unto almonds with a knop and a flower in one branch.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxv.
33.</note> It follows that the bowls were twenty-two, and the knops eleven,
and the flowers nine. <q>The bowls, to what were they like?</q>
<q>To cups of Alexandria.</q> <q>The knops, to what were they
like?</q> <q>To the apples of pine-trees.</q><note place='foot'>Or, <q>egg-shaped,
oval.</q></note> <q>The flowers, to
what were they like?</q> <q>To the flowers on the pillars of the
temple.</q> It is found that you learn that there exist in the
candlestick difficulty and forgetfulness more than in all the
other vessels. <q>And whence know we that OMNIPRESENCE
showed to Moses, the vessels ready, and the candlestick
ready?</q> As it is said, <q>see and make them according
to their patterns.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxv. 40.</note> Although Solomon made ten
candlesticks and all of them were lawful for service, as is said, <q>And
he made ten candlesticks of gold according to their form, and
set them in the temple, five on the right hand and five on the
left.</q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. iv. 7.</note> If you say, five on the south and
five on the north, is not the candlestick on the north worthless? <q>And what
is meant by saying, five on the right hand and five on the left?</q>
<q>Five on the right side of the candlestick of Moses, and five
on the left side of the candlestick of Moses, even though they
lighted the candlestick of Moses only, as is said, <q>And the
candlestick of gold, with the lamps thereof, to burn every
evening.</q></q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. xiii. 11.</note> Rabbi José, the son of
Rabbi Judah, said, <q>they were all lighted,</q> as is said, <q>Moreover the
candlesticks with their lamps, that they should burn after the manner, before
the oracle of pure gold; and the flowers, and the lamps, and
the tongs made he of gold, and that perfect gold.</q><note place='foot'>2 Chron iv.
20, 21</note> All these completed the golden one of Moses. Those on the west and
east flamed in front of the middle light, as is said, <q>The seven
lamps shall give light over against the candlestick.</q><note place='foot'>Num. viii.
2.</note> From thence Rabbi Nathan said, <q>the middle one is the most honorable.</q>
<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>
The seven lamps flamed alike, and their lamps were
equal, and they resembled each other. <q>How did they snuff
it?</q> <q>They removed the snuff from the candlestick and deposited
it in the tent, and rubbed it with a sponge.</q> <q>It follows
that many priests were busied on one lamp.</q> The words
of Rabbi José. But the Sages say, <q>they did not remove the
lamps from their places; they only removed the snuff from
the candlestick, as is said, <q>He shall order the lamps upon the
pure candlestick.</q></q><note place='foot'>Lev. xxiv. 4.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XI</head>

<p>
The altar of incense was in length a cubit, and
in breadth a cubit, and in height two cubits, as is said, <q>And
thou shalt make an altar to burn incense upon; of shittim-wood
shalt thou make it. A cubit shall be the length thereof,
and a cubit the breadth thereof: four square shall it be: and
two cubits shall be the height thereof: the horns thereof shall
be of the same.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxx. 1.</note> And it was all overlaid with
gold.<note place='foot'>Exod. xxx. 3.</note> This
altar had three names, the altar of incense, the altar of gold,
the inner altar. <emph>The altar of burnt-offerings</emph> was in
length five cubits, and in breadth five cubits, and in height
three cubits, as is said, <q>And he made the altar of burnt-offering
of shittim-wood: five cubits was the length thereof, and
five cubits the breadth thereof; it was four-square; and three
cubits the height thereof.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxxviii. 1.</note> The words of
Rabbi Meier. To him said Rabbi José, <q>from hearing what is said five by five
do we not know that it is four-square? What is the meaning
of saying four-square?</q> <q>It is superfluous, save for identification
in pronouncing with regard to it an equal decision. It
is said here four-square, and there four-square.</q> <q>What four-square
is meant there?</q> <q>That its height is double its
breadth, even the four-square mentioned here means that its
height is double its breadth.</q> Rabbi Meier said to him, <q>if
it be according to thy words, it follows that the altar is higher
than the curtains.</q> Rabbi José; answered him, <q>and is it not
already said, <q>And the hangings of the court, and the hanging
for the door of the gate of the court, which is by the tabernacle,
and by the altar round about.</q></q><note place='foot'>Num. iv. 26.</note> As the
tabernacle
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>
was ten cubits broad, so the altar of burnt-offerings was ten
cubits broad. A painted line girdled it in the middle to divide
between the blood (sprinkled) above, and the blood (sprinkled)
below. The painted line and downward was five cubits. The
foundation was a cubit. And three cubits was the compass,
and the circuit was a cubit, and there they put the blood
sprinkled below. The painted line and upward was five cubits&mdash;a
cubit the horns, and three cubits the compass, and one
cubit the circuit. And there they put the blood which was
sprinkled above. And the blood intended to be sprinkled on
the painted line and downward, if it were put on the painted
line and upward, was worthless. And the blood that was intended
to be sprinkled above the painted line, if it were put
on the painted line and downward, was worthless. The altar
which Moses made in the wilderness was in height ten cubits,
and the one which Solomon made was in height ten cubits,
and the one which the children of the captivity made was in
height ten cubits, and the one prepared for the Future, its
height is ten cubits. The altar of burnt-offerings was placed
in the midst of the court (with) its ascent on the south, with
the laver on the west, with the slaughter-house on the north,
and all the Israelites to the east, as is said, <q>And all the congregation
drew near and stood before the Lord.</q><note place='foot'>Lev. ix. 5.</note> This
altar had three names, the altar of burnt-offering, the altar of brass,
the outer altar.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XII</head>

<p>
Moses made one LAVER, as is said, <q>Thou shalt also make
a laver of brass.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxx. 18.</note> Solomon made ten lavers,
as is said, <q>He made also ten lavers, and put five on the right hand, and five
on the left, to wash.</q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. iv. 6.</note> <q>There is no
meaning in saying <q>five on the right hand, and five on the left,</q> and what is the
meaning of saying <q>five on the right hand, and five on the left</q>?</q>
<q>Five on the right of the laver of Moses, and five on the left
of the laver of Moses.</q> Solomon added to it when he made
the sea, as is said, <q>And he made a molten sea, ten cubits
from the one brim to the other; it was round all about, and
his height was five cubits; and a line of thirty cubits did compass
<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>
it round about. And it was an hand-breadth thick, and
the brim thereof was wrought like the brim of a cup, with
flowers of lilies, it contained two thousand baths.</q><note place='foot'>1 Kings vii.
23, 26.</note> It is not possible to say <q>two thousand,</q> since before it is said
<q>three thousand,</q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. iv. 5.</note> and it is not possible
to say <q>three thousand,</q> since before it is said <q>two thousand.</q> <q>How can it
be?</q> <q>Two thousand liquid make three thousand dry measure.</q> But
you don't know how much is the bath until it be said, <q>The
ephah and the bath contain one measure,</q><note place='foot'>Ezek. xlv. 11, 14.</note>
<q>for ten baths are a homer.</q> <q>Allow ten baths for every cur&mdash;there are 200
curs. Subtract from them fifty curs, and allow fifty square,
there are 150 cleansing-pools; since every pool contains forty
seahs.</q> <q>And from whence do we know that every pool contains
forty seahs?</q> <q>As is said, <q>And bathe his flesh in
water,</q><note place='foot'>Lev. xv. 13.</note> water to cover all his flesh.</q>
<q>And how much is it?</q> <q>A square cubit, in height three cubits.</q> From thence
the Sages judged the measure of a pool to be forty seahs. <q>And
how can it contain 150 cleansing-pools, if thou shalt say it
was all round?</q> <q>It could not contain them.</q> <q>If thou
shalt say it was all square?</q> <q>It therefore contained more.</q>
But the three lowest cubits were square; allow for ten cubits
square, there are 100 cubits. Allow for a hundred square;
there are 100 cleansing-pools. The two highest cubits were
round. Allow for ten cubits square; there are seventy-five
cubits. Allow for seventy-five square; there are 150. Allow
for fifty square; there are fifty cleansing-pools; since the square
exceeds the round by a fourth. <q>And whence do we know
that the square exceeds the round by a fourth?</q> <q>As is said,
<q>Ten cubits from brim to brim, round in compass, and a line
of thirty cubits did compass it round about.</q></q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. iv.
2.</note> This teaches that the square exceeds the round by a fourth. <q>And whence
do we know that it was round above?</q> <q>As is said, <q>And
it was an hand-breadth thick, and the brim thereof was
wrought like the brim of a cup.</q></q> <q>And whence know we
that it was square below?</q> <q>As is said, <q>It stood upon twelve
oxen, three looking toward the north, and three looking toward
the west, and three looking toward the south, and three looking
toward the east.</q></q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. iv. 4.</note> And what is meant by
saying <q>looking
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>
toward</q> four times; but that when one entered the temple
he looked toward the right; when he entered into the court,
he looked toward the right; when he entered the Mountain
of the House, he looked toward the right; when the priest went
up to the top of the altar, he looked toward the right. <q>And
under it was the similitude of oxen, which did compass it
round about, ten in a cubit, compassing the sea round
about. Two rows of oxen.</q><note place='foot'>2 Chron. iv. 3.</note> It follows that
(there were) four rows of the heads of oxen, which served for the four sides,
as is said, <q>And the similitude of oxen, two rows of oxen were
cast when it was cast.</q><note place='foot'>The Jerusalem Talmud states that
the water poured through the feet of the oxen, and that this was the well of
Etham.</note> And it was all cast even from the
feet of the ox.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XIII</head>

<p>
<q>How did the Levites guard the tabernacle?</q> <q>The family
of Kohath watched on the south, as is said, <q>The families of the
sons of Kohath shall pitch on the side of the tabernacle
southward.</q><note place='foot'>Num. iii. 29.</note>
And they were overseers of the vessels of the ark, as
is said, <q>And their charge shall be the ark, and the table, and the
candlestick, and the altars, and the vessels of the sanctuary
wherewith they minister, and the hanging and all the service
thereof.</q><note place='foot'>Num. iii. 31.</note> Outside of them were the three
tribes of Reuben, Simeon, Levi. The family of Gershon watched in the west, as
is said, <q>The families of the Gershonites shall pitch behind the
tabernacle westward.</q><note place='foot'>Num. iii. 23.</note> And they were intrusted
with all the vessels of the tabernacle, as is said, <q>And they shall bear the
curtains of the tabernacle, and the tabernacle of the
congregation.</q><note place='foot'>Num. iv. 25.</note>
Outside of them were the three tribes of Ephraim,
and Manasseh, and Benjamin. The family of Merari watched
on the north, as is said, <q>And the chief of the house of the
father of the families of Merari was Zuriel the son of Abihail:
these shall pitch on the side of the tabernacle northward.</q><note place='foot'>Num.
iii. 35.</note> And they were intrusted with the taches, and boards, and bars,
and pillars, and the sockets of the tabernacle, as is said, <q>And
under the custody and charge of the sons of Merari shall be
the boards of the tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the pillars
<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>
thereof, and the sockets thereof.</q><note place='foot'>Num. iii. 36.</note> And outside
of them were the three tribes of Dan, Asher, and Naphtali. On the east
were Moses, Aaron, and their families, as is said, <q>But those
that encamp before the tabernacle toward the east, even
before the tabernacle of the congregation eastward, shall be
Moses and Aaron and his sons.</q><note place='foot'>Num. iii. 38.</note> And outside of
them were the three tribes of Judah, Yissachar, and Zebulon. The whole
encampment of Israel was twelve miles. The standard of
Judah was four miles, and the encampment of the Levites, and
the encampment of the SHECHINAH, four miles. The standard
of Reuben was four miles. The standard of Ephraim was
four miles. The encampment of the Levites and the encampment
of the SHECHINAH was four miles. And the encampment
of Dan was four miles. It follows <emph>that</emph> the four
corners of the tabernacle were four encampments for service
on every side, as is said, <q>Then the tabernacle of the congregation
shall set forward with the camp of the Levites in the
midst of the camp; as they encamp so shall they set forward,
every man in his place by their standards.</q><note place='foot'>Num. ii. 17.</note> So
soon as Israel set forward, the pillar of cloud which was standing still rolled
up and spread out over the children of Judah like a kind of beam.
The (trumpet) sounded, and blew an alarm, and sounded, and
the standard of Judah moved forward first, as is said, <q>In the
first place went the standard of the camp of the children of
Judah according to their armies.</q><note place='foot'>Num. x. 14.</note> At once Aaron
and his sons entered (the Tabernacle) and took down the vail, and with
it they covered the ark, as is said, <q>And when the camp setteth
forward, Aaron shall come and his sons, and they shall take
down the covering vail, and cover the ark of testimony with
it.</q><note place='foot'>Num. iv. 5.</note> The (trumpet) sounded, and blew an alarm,
and sounded, and the standard of the encampment of Reuben set
forward. At once the sons of Gershon, and the sons of Merari
entered, and took down the tabernacle, and loaded it on the
wagon. And they set up the tabernacle before the sons of
Kohath came, as is said, <q>And the Kohathites set forward,
bearing the sanctuary; and the other did set up the tabernacle
against they came.</q><note place='foot'>Num. x. 21.</note> And the trumpet sounded, and
blew an alarm, and sounded, and the standard of Ephraim moved forward;
<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>
the children of Kohath entered and took down the holy
vessels, and loaded them on their shoulders, as is said, <q>And
when Aaron and his sons have made an end of covering the
sanctuary and all the vessels of the sanctuary, as the camp is
to set forward; after that the sons of Kohath shall come to
bear it.</q><note place='foot'>Num. iv. 15.</note> The (trumpet) sounded, and blew an
alarm, and sounded. And the standard of Dan moved forward, as is said,
<q>And the standard of the camp of the children of Dan set
forward.</q><note place='foot'>Num. x. 22.</note> It follows that two standards were in
front, and two standards were in the rear, and the encampment of the
Levites, and the encampment of the SHECHINAH was in the
middle, as is said, <q>Then the tabernacle of the congregation
shall set forward with the camp of the Levites in the midst of
the camp.</q><note place='foot'>Num. ii. 17.</note> And as they encamped, so they set
forward, as is said, <q>As they encamp, so shall they set forward.</q> Israel
set forward by three commands, by command of the HOLY
BLESSED ONE, by command of Moses, and by command of
the trumpets.</q> <q>Whence know we the command of the HOLY
BLESSED ONE?</q> <q>As is said, <q>At the commandment of the
Lord, the children of Israel journeyed, and at the commandment
of the Lord they pitched,</q></q><note place='foot'>Num. ix. 18.</note> etc. <q>By the
commandment of the Lord by the hand of Moses.</q><note place='foot'>Num. ix. 23.</note>
<q>By commandment of Moses&mdash;how?</q> <q>Moses said in the evening, <q>early
in the morning you must go forward.</q></q> At once the Israelites
began to gather their cattle, and prepared their furniture for the
march. <q>By commandment of the trumpets whence know we
it?</q> <q>As is said, <q>Make thee two trumpets of silver, etc., that
thou mayest use them for the calling of the assembly, and for
the journeying of the camps.</q></q><note place='foot'>Num. x. 2.</note> <q>How?</q>
<q>The trumpets sounded, blew an alarm, and sounded three blasts for every
standard.</q> Rabbi Judah said, <q>there were three blasts for every
tribe.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XIV</head>

<p>
When Israel was to encamp, the pillar of cloud rose up and
spread out over the children of Judah like a kind of booth, and
it covered the tent outward, and filled the tabernacle inward;
as is said, <q>Then a cloud covered the tent of the congregation,
<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>
and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xl.
34.</note> And this was one of the clouds of glory, which served the Israelites in the
wilderness forty years. One on the right hand, and one on the
left, and one before them, and one behind them. And one
over them, and a cloud dwelling in their midst (and the cloud,
the SHECHINAH which was in the Tent), and the pillar of
cloud which moved before them, making low before them the
high (places), and making high before them the low (places),
and killing serpents and scorpions, and burning thorns and
briers, and guiding them in a straight way. Rabbi Simon, the
son of José, said, <q>during the forty years, when the Israelites
were in the wilderness, none of them had need of the light of the
sun by day, nor the light of the moon by night. When it became
reddish they knew that the sun had set, and when it became
whitish they knew that the sun rose. And when one looked into
a barrel, he knew what was in it; and into a pitcher, and he
knew what was in it, by reason of the cloud, the SHECHINAH
in their midst,</q> as is said, <q>For the cloud of the Lord was upon
the tabernacle by day, and fire was on it by night, in the sight of
all the house of Israel throughout all their journey.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xl.
38.</note> And so it is prepared to come in the future: as is said, <q>Arise, shine;
for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon
thee.</q> <q>The sun shall be no more thy light by day; neither
for brightness shall the moon give light unto thee: but the
Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light.</q> <q>Thy sun shall
no more go down; neither shall thy moon withdraw itself; for
the Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and the days of thy
mourning shall be ended.</q><note place='foot'>Isa. lx. 1, 19, 20.</note> <q>From whence
did the SHECHINAH speak with Moses?</q> Rabbi Nathan said,
<q>from the altar of incense,</q> as is said, <q rend='pre'>And thou shalt put it
before the vail that is by the ark of the testimony, etc.,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='post'>WHERE I WILL MEET WITH THEE.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxx. 6.</note>
</p>

<p>
Rabbi Simon, the son of Yochai, said, <q>beside the altar of
incense,</q> as is said, <q rend='pre'>And thou shalt beat some of it very small,
and put of it before the testimony in the tabernacle of the congregation,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='post'>WHERE I WILL MEET WITH THEE.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxx. 36.</note>
</p>

<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>

<p>
The disciples of Rabbi Ishmael said, <q>beside the altar of
burnt-offering,</q> as is said, <q rend='pre'>This shall be a continual burnt-offering
throughout your generations at the door of the tabernacle
of the congregation, before the Lord,</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='post'>WHERE I WILL MEET YOU.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. xxix. 42.</note>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Heifer<note place='foot'>The Jews say that Solomon, who
understood all the commands of God, could not comprehend the full meaning
of the Red Heifer.</note></head>

<quote rend='display'>
The Heifer's Age&mdash;Ages of Other Offerings&mdash;Places From Which the Red
Heifer May Come&mdash;Blemishes&mdash;Black Hairs&mdash;Separation of the Priest
for Burning the Red Heifer&mdash;Sprinkling&mdash;Lads who Drew Water
from Siloam&mdash;Number of Red Heifers&mdash;Bridge to the Mount of
Olives&mdash;Procession of Heifer and Attendants&mdash;Pile for Burning&mdash;Position
of the Heifer&mdash;Position of the Priest&mdash;Slaughter of the Heifer&mdash;Sprinkling
the Blood&mdash;Kindling the Pile&mdash;Gathering the Ashes&mdash;Doctrine
of Intention&mdash;Vessels&mdash;Pumpkin Bottles&mdash;A Hollow
Reed&mdash;Purifications&mdash;Cases
of Casuistry&mdash;Seas&mdash;Wells&mdash;Reptiles&mdash;A
Clean Place&mdash;Hyssop&mdash;Sprinkling.
</quote>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I</head>

<p>
1. Rabbi Eliezer said, <q>the red heifer must be a calf of a
year old or a heifer of two years.</q> But the Sages say, <q>a
calf of two years and a heifer of three years or of four years.</q>
Rabbi Meier said, <q>even of five years she is allowed, or older.
But they are not to wait (longer) for her, lest she turn black
and be disallowed.</q> Rabbi Joshua said, <q>I only heard,
third.</q> They said to him, <q>what is the meaning of <q>third</q>?</q>
He said to them, <q>thus I heard it, without explanation.</q> The
son of Azai said, <q>I will explain it, if you say <q>third,</q> that is
to others in counting; but if you say <q>one of three,</q> that is, of
three years.</q> As when they say, <q>a fourth vineyard.</q> They
said to him, <q>what means <q>fourth</q>?</q> He said to them, <q>thus
I heard it, without explanation.</q> Said the son of Azai, <q>I
will explain. If you say <q>fourth,</q> that is, to others in counting.
But as you say <q>one of four,</q> that is, of four years. As
when they say, he who eats in a leprous house a half-loaf,<note place='foot'>The meaning
is that he who spends as much time in a leprous house as is
sufficient for eating a loaf of such a size, becomes defiled in his garments. See
<q>Leprosy,</q> xiii. 10.</note>
of three loaves to the cab of flour.</q> They say to him, <q>say
<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>
eighteen loaves to the seah of flour.</q> He said to them, <q>Thus
I heard it, without explanation.</q> Said the son of Azai, <q>I
will explain. If you say, <q>three to the cab,</q> there is no dough-offering.
But if you say, <q>eighteen to the seah,</q> the dough-offering
diminishes it.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. R. José the Galilean said, <q>the cleansing of the Levites
required bullocks of two years old,</q> as is said, <q>And another
young bullock shalt thou take for a sin-offering.</q><note place='foot'>Num. viii.
8.</note> But the Sages say, <q>even of three years.</q> R. Meier said, <q>bullocks
even of four and five years are allowed, but old ones are not
brought, for honor's sake.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. Sacrifices required lambs of a year old and rams of two
years old, and all (are reckoned) from day to day.<note place='foot'>The age of the
lamb was reckoned from its birthday in Elul of last year
till the first day of Elul in the current year.</note> If they be
thirteen months old, neither ram nor lamb is allowed. R.
Tarphon called it, <q>half and between.</q> The son of Azai
called it, <q>pointed out.</q> R. Ishmael called it, <q>recalled coin.</q>
If the ram be brought for offering, and the libation of the ram
be brought with him, it does not pass for his offering, except
he be thirteen months and one day old. That is the law for
the ram.
</p>

<p>
4. The sin-offering of the congregation and their burnt-offerings,
the sin-offering of an individual and the trespass-offering
of the Nazarite and the trespass-offering of the leper
are allowed for thirty days and upward, and even on the
thirtieth day. And if they are brought on the eighth day, they
are allowed; vows, freewill-offerings, the first-born, and the
tithe and the passover are allowed from the eighth day and
upward, and even on the eighth day.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II</head>

<p>
1. Rabbi Eliezer said, <q>a heifer for a sin-offering is allowed
even in pregnancy.</q> But the Sages disallow her. R. Eliezer
said, <q>she is not to be taken from foreigners.</q> But the Sages
allow her. And not only she, but all the offerings of the congregation,
and of the individual, may come from the Land (of
Israel), or from outside the land, from the fresh harvest and
<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>
from the old harvest, except the omer,<note place='foot'>Lev. xxiii. 10, 17. The omer or
wave-sheaf of barley was always cut on the evening of the 15th Nisan, even
though it were a Sabbath. It must always have been gathered from a fresh
harvest cultivated even in the Sabbatical year. The reapers asked these questions
three times of those who were witnesses, <q>Has the sun gone down?</q>
<q>With this sickle?</q> <q>Into this basket?</q> <q>On this Sabbath [first day
of the Passover]?</q> <q>Shall I reap?</q> After the witnesses answered these questions
the sheaf was reaped. It was finally ground into flour, and a handful
of it mixed with frankincense was burned on the altar. The remainder belonged
to the priests.</note> and the two loaves,<note place='foot'>Num. xxviii. The two
wave-loaves of wheaten flour were always offered on the Jewish Pentecost.</note>
which may only come from the fresh harvest, and from the
Land.
</p>

<p>
2. A heifer whose horns and hoofs are black should have
them cut away. The pupil of the eye and the teeth and the
tongue cause no blemish in the heifer. If she be diminutive,
she is allowed. <q>Had she a wen which was cut away?</q> R.
Judah <q>disallowed her.</q> Rabbi Simon said, <q>every place
which was cut down, and no red hair sprang up in its place,
renders her blemished.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. A heifer produced from the side or from the hire of immorality
or exchanged for a dog is disallowed. R. Eliezer
allowed it, <q>as is said, <q>Thou shalt not bring the hire of a
whore or the price of a dog into the house of the Lord thy
God.</q><note place='foot'>Deut. xxiii. 18.</note> But she did not come into the
house.</q> All blemishes which are disallowed in holy things are disallowed in the
heifer. If one rode on her or leaned on her or hung something
on her tail or crossed a river on her or doubled the rope
over her or put his garment on her, she is disallowed. But
if one bound her with a rope or made a shoe to prevent her
slipping or spread his garment over her because of the flies,
she is allowed. This is the rule: Everything which was necessary
for her is allowed; if there be any use of her for another's
benefit, she is disallowed.
</p>

<p>
4. If a bird rested on her, she is allowed. If the male came
to her, she is disallowed. R. Judah said, <q>if he were brought,
she is disallowed, but if he came of himself, she is allowed.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. If she had two black or white hairs in one cavity, she is
disallowed. R. Judah said, <q>even in one pore.</q> <q>If they be
in two pores and they prove united?</q> <q>She is disallowed.</q>
Rabbi Akiba said, <q>even four or five, if they be scattered, may
be plucked out.</q> Rabbi Eleazar said, <q>even fifty.</q> R.
Joshua, son of Bathira, said, <q>if there be even one in her head
<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>
and one in her tail, she is disallowed.</q> <q>If there be two hairs,
their roots black and their tops red, their roots red and their
tops black?</q> <q>All follows after the appearance,</q> the words
of Rabbi Meier. But the Sages say, <q>after the root.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III</head>

<p>
1. Seven days before the burning of the heifer, the priest
who burned the heifer was removed from his house to the
chamber in front of the Temple Palace toward the northeast;<note place='foot'>Nehem. ii.
8. 1 Chron. xxix. 1.</note> and it was called the Stone House. And he was sprinkled
during all the seven days from all the ashes of red heifers
which were there. R. José said, <q>they did not sprinkle him
save on the third and seventh days only.</q> R. Hananiah, the
deputy high-priest, said, <q>on the priest who burned the heifer
they sprinkled during all the seven days, but on him who took
service on the Day of Atonement they did not sprinkle save
on the third and seventh days only.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. There were courts in Jerusalem built of stone, and beneath
they were hollow,<note place='foot'>According to Jewish tradition a dead
body covered in with earth conveyed legal uncleanness to everyone who
walked over it; but if a vault was over the body, or if air intervened between
the corpse and the surface of the ground, it was regarded as a non-conductor.
There are reckoned six degrees of uncleanness&mdash;the father of fathers,
the fathers, the first, second, third, and fourth children of defilement. There
are altogether twenty-nine fathers of uncleanness, of which eleven arise from
contact with a dead body.</note> through fear of an unseen grave.
And pregnant women were brought, and they were delivered
there. And there they reared their sons, and oxen were
brought with doors on their backs, and the lads were seated
on them with stone cups in their hands. They came to
Siloam, they dismounted, and filled them. They remounted,
and returned on the backs of the oxen. R. José said, <q>from
their seats on the backs of the oxen they let down (the cups)
and filled them (with water).</q>
</p>

<p>
3. The lads came back to the Mountain of the House and
dismounted. The Mountain of the House and its courts were
hollow below, through fear of an unseen grave. And at the
door of the court there were prepared the ashes of the red
heifers; and they brought a ram from the sheep, and they
twisted a rope between his horns, and they twisted a stick and
<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>
stuck it into the end of the rope, and it was dipped into the
ashes, and the ram got a blow, and he skipped backward, and
took them, and caused them to appear on the surface of the
water. R. José said, <q>you should not give an opportunity to
the Sadducees for scoffing: but (the lad) took and prepared
the ashes.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. They did not make use of (what pertained) to one red
heifer for a second one, nor did they use another lad for<note place='foot'>Some
commentators explain that <q>each heifer requires a fresh lad.</q></note> his
(prepared) companion. <q>And the lads themselves were in
need of sprinkling,</q> the words of Rabbi José the Galilean.
R. Akiba said, <q>they had no need of sprinkling.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. If they did not find (ashes) of seven red heifers, six were
sufficient, five, four, three, two, one. <q>And who made them?</q>
<q>Moses made the first, and Ezra the second, and (there were)
five from Ezra and afterward,</q> the words of Rabbi Meier.
But the Sages say, <q>seven from Ezra and afterward.</q> <q>And
who made them?</q> <q>Simon the Just, and John the High-priest
made each two. Elihueni, son of Hakuf, and Hanamel
the Egyptian, and Ishmael, son of Piani, made one each.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. And a causeway was made from the Mountain of the
House to the Mount of Olives, with arches over arches. And
there was an arch in front of the last pillar for fear of an unseen
grave. Over it the priest who burned the heifer, and the
heifer with all her attendants, proceeded to the Mount of
Olives.
</p>

<p>
7. If the heifer were unwilling to go, they did not bring
with her a black one, lest it be said, <q>they slaughtered a black
one</q> nor a red one, lest it be said, <q>they slaughtered two.</q>
R. José said, this was not the reason, but because it is only
said, <q>That he may bring her forth.</q><note place='foot'>Num. xix. 3.</note> And the
elders of Israel preceded her on foot to the Mount of Olives. And a
house for washing was there. And the priest who burned the
heifer was rendered unclean because of the Sadducees,<note place='foot'>The Pharisees
asserted that a priest might be defiled, and that after washing
he was legally clean for burning the red heifer. But the Sadducees maintained
that he was not legally clean before sunset. Num. xix. 9, 10.</note> lest
they should say, <q>it is needful for sunset to pass over him.</q><note place='foot'>Lev.
xxii. 7.</note>
</p>

<p>
8. The elders put their hands on the priest and said, <q>my
Lord High-priest, wash once.</q> He descended and washed,
<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>
and he came up and wiped himself. And wood was set in
order there, cedar and ash and cypress and fig-wood smoothed.
And it was made like a tower, and windows were opened in it,
and their direction was westward.
</p>

<p>
9. The red heifer was bound with a rope of bulrushes and
she was put on the place of preparation, with her head southward
and with her face westward. The priest stood in the
east with his face westward. He slaughtered the heifer with
his right hand, and received (the blood) in his left hand. R.
Judah said, <q>he received it in his right hand and put it into
his left, and sprinkled it with his right hand.</q> He dipped
his hand, and sprinkled the blood seven times in front of the
House of the Holy of Holies. For every sprinkling of blood
he dipped his hand. When he finished sprinkling the blood
he wiped his hand on the body of the heifer. He went down
and kindled the fire with chips. Rabbi Akiba said, <q>with
palm-branches.</q>
</p>

<p>
10. She burst and moved from her place. He took cedar-wood
and hyssop and scarlet (wool). He said to them, <q>is
this cedar-wood, is this cedar-wood?</q> <q>is this hyssop, is
this hyssop?</q> <q>is this scarlet, is this scarlet?</q> three times
for each thing. And they said to him, <q>yes,</q> <q>yes,</q> three
times for each thing.
</p>

<p>
11. He wrapped them in the remainder<note place='foot'>The cedar, hyssop, and scarlet wool
were laid parallel to each other, and whatever portion of the scarlet wool remained
too long was wrapped round the bundle.</note> of the tongue of
scarlet wool, and cast them into the midst of the burning.
When the fire was burned down, the ashes were beaten with
sticks and sifted with sieves. R. Ishmael said, <q>with stone
hammers, and the work was finished with stone sieves.</q> A
black piece in which there are ashes must be pulverized, and
that which has no ashes is left. Bones with or without ashes
were pulverized. And they were divided into three parts.
One part was put in the Chel, and one was put on the Mount
of Olives, and one was divided for all the guards<note place='foot'>Num. xix. 9.</note>
(<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the representatives of all Israel).
</p>

</div>

<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV</head>

<p>
1. <q>The heifer which was slaughtered without the proper
intention, (the priest) caught the blood and sprinkled it without
the proper intention, or with the proper intention and
afterward without the proper intention, or without the proper
intention and (afterward) with the proper intention?</q> <q>She
is disallowed.</q> R. Eliezer <q>allowed her.</q> <q>And if the priest
did not wash his hands and his feet?</q> <q>She is disallowed.</q>
R. Eliezer <q>allowed her.</q> <q>If she was not slaughtered by
the High-priest?</q> <q>She is disallowed.</q> R. Judah <q>allowed
her.</q> <q>If any of his garments were wanting?</q> <q>She is disallowed.</q>
And the rites were performed in white vestments.
</p>

<p>
2. <q>If the priest burned her out of her prepared place, or in
two places, or burned two in one place?</q> <q>She is disallowed.</q>
<q>If he sprinkled her blood but not straight in front
of the DOOR?</q> <q>She is disallowed.</q> <q>If he sprinkled her
blood the sixth time for the seventh&mdash;he then turned and
sprinkled the seventh?</q> <q>She is disallowed.</q> <q>If the priest
sprinkled the seventh time for the eighth&mdash;he then turned
and sprinkled the eighth?</q> <q>She is allowed.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. <q>If the priest burned the red heifer without wood, or with
every sort of wood, even with stubble and dung?</q><note place='foot'>Or thick parts of
straw.</note> <q>She is allowed.</q> <q>If he skinned and cut her?</q> <q>She is
allowed.</q> <q>If he slaughtered her on condition of eating from her flesh
and drinking from her blood?</q> <q>She is allowed.</q> Rabbi
Eliezer said, <q>intention does not disallow the heifer.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. All who are busied about the heifer from the beginning
to the end render their garments legally unclean. And any
work gained from her renders her disallowed. If any illegality
happened during her slaughter, she does not render their garments
unclean. If it happened during the sprinkling of her
blood, everyone busied before her disallowance renders his
garments unclean. After her disallowance he does not render
his garments unclean. It follows that her difficulty is his
convenience. They who are busied about her are always liable
for a trespass-offering. They may add wood to her during her
burning. And her business is done in the day and by a priest.
<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>
Every work for gain with her causes her disallowance until
she be reduced to ashes. And work for gain causes disallowance
in the water also, until the ashes be strewn upon it.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V</head>

<p>
1. He who brings earthen vessels for the ashes of the heifer
must wash them, and place them in the furnace over night.
Rabbi Judah said, <q>even if he bring them from his house they
are allowed. Since everyone is trusted about the heifer. But
in the heave-offering he opens the furnace and takes out the
vessels.</q> R. Simon said, <q>from the second<note place='foot'>If the vessels had been
in the first row, someone might have touched them,
or some vessel might have come in contact with them, so as to render them
unclean.</note> row.</q> R. José said, <q>from the third row.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. He who washes vessels for the ashes of the red heifer,
in water unsuitable for purification, must dry them. If he
wash them in water suitable for purification, it is not necessary
to dry them. If he add therein water for purification, whether
of one sort or the other sort of water, he must dry them.
</p>

<p>
3. A pumpkin bottle which is washed in water unsuitable
for purification, may be used for purification, till it becomes
legally unclean. When it is unclean, they may no longer
purify in it. R. Joshua said, <q>if one purify in it at first, one
may purify in it to the last; if it cannot purify at last, it cannot
purify at first.</q> Whether it be clean or unclean, one must
not add therein water for purification.
</p>

<p>
4. <q>A hollow reed cut for the ashes of the red heifer?</q> R.
Eliezer said, <q>it must be washed at once.</q> R. Joshua said,
<q>it must be rendered legally unclean, and afterward washed.</q>
Everyone is suitable for purifying excepting a deaf person, an
idiot, and a child. R. Judah <q>allows a child, but disallows a
woman and a neuter.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. Water may be prepared for purification in every vessel,
even in vessels of dung, in vessels of stone and vessels of clay
and in a boat. Water must not be prepared for purification
in the sides of vessels nor in the bottom of a vase nor in the
cork of a barrel nor in one's fists, since they are not used for
filling water, and they must not purify with them. And the
<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>
water of the ashes of the heifer is not sprinkled without a vessel.
There is no safety from defilement in the covering<note place='foot'>Num. xix. 15.</note>
bound except in proper vessels&mdash;there is no safety from the
defilement of earthen vessels except in proper vessels.
</p>

<p>
6. An egg-shaped vessel of the potters is allowed for the
purifying water. R. José <q>disallows it.</q> <q>The egg (shell)
of a hen?</q> R. Meier and R. Judah <q>allow it,</q> but the Sages
<q>disallow it.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. <q>A trough in a rock?</q> <q>They do not fill water with
it, they do not purify in it, and they do not sprinkle from it,
and it does not need the covering bound, and it does not disallow<note place='foot'>It
does not disallow the purifying pool if water flowed through a crevice
in the rock into the pool.</note> the purifying-pool.</q> <q>If there were a vessel united
(to it) with lime?</q> <q>They may fill water with it, they may
purify in it, and sprinkle from it, and it needs a covering
bound, and (if it becomes legally unclean) it disallows the
purifying pool.</q> <q>It had a hole in the bottom, and it was
stuffed with a rag?</q> <q>The water in it is disallowed, because
it is not (entirely) surrounded with the vessel.</q> <q>If the hole
were in the side, and it was stuffed with a rag?</q> <q>The water
within it is allowed, because it is surrounded with the vessel.</q>
<q>If a rim of mud was made for it, and the water rose up to
it?</q> <q>It is disallowed.</q> <q>If it were so strong that the vessel
could be lifted by it?</q> <q>It is allowed.</q>
</p>

<p>
8. <q>There are two troughs in one stone. One of them is
legally purified. The water in the second is not purified.
There are holes from one trough to the other like the pipe of
a bottle, or water overflowed from above only as much as the
peeling of a garlic, and the owner had purified one of them?</q>
<q>The water in the second can also purify.</q>
</p>

<p>
9. <q>Two stones which are placed near to each other, and
one made of them a (drinking-) trough, and also two kneading-troughs,
and also a drinking-trough, which was divided?</q>
<q>The water, which is between them, does not purify.</q> <q>If
one connected them with lime or gypsum, and they can be
lifted at once?</q> <q>The water, which is between them, can
purify.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI</head>

<p>
1. <q>When one wishes to purify, and the ashes of purification
have fallen on his hand or upon the side (of the vessel),
and they afterward fell on a drinking-trough?</q> <q>They are
disallowed.</q> <q>If water of purification fell from a pipe on the
trough?</q> <q>It is disallowed.</q> <q>He took the water of purification
out of the pipe, and covered the pipe or shut the door
with it?</q> <q>The ashes of purification are allowed, but the
water is disallowed.</q> <q>He laid it on the ground?</q> <q>It is
disallowed.</q> <q>He laid it in his hand?</q> <q>It is allowed, because
it is not otherwise possible.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. <q>If the ashes swam on the surface of the water?</q> R.
Meier and Rabbi Simon said, <q>one may take them and
purify</q>; but the Sages say, <q>all ashes which have once
touched water, cannot purify.</q> <q>If one have sprinkled the
water, and the ashes be found at the bottom?</q> R. Meier and
R. Simon said, <q>He may dry them and purify</q>; but the Sages
say, <q>all ashes which have (once) touched water, cannot
purify.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. <q>If one prepare water for purification in a trough, and
there be a jug in it?</q> <q>Though its mouth be ever so narrow,
the water therein can purify.</q> <q>If there be a sponge?</q> <q>The
water in it is disallowed.</q> <q>How is one to act?</q> <q>He is to
sprinkle till he come to the sponge. When he has touched the
sponge, even if the water swim over it ever so little, it is disallowed.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. <q>One has put in his hand or his foot, or leaves of vegetables,
so that the water of purification has run over to another
vessel?</q> <q>It is disallowed.</q> If they were leaves of
reeds or leaves of nuts, they are allowed. This is the rule:
The thing which contracts uncleanness is disallowed; and the
thing which does not contract uncleanness is allowed.
</p>

<p>
5. <q>If one divert a well into a vat-shaped pool or into a
marsh?</q> <q>The water in them is disallowed for issues and
leprosies, or to purify with it as with the water of the ashes of
the heifer, since it is not filled in a vessel.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VII</head>

<p>
1. <q>When five persons filled five barrels with water of purification,
to purify five persons requiring purification, and they
changed their mind for one purification, or they prepared for
one purification, and they changed their mind for five?</q>
<q>They are all allowed.</q> <q>One person who filled five barrels
to purify five persons requiring purification, and changed his
mind for one purification?</q> <q>None is allowed but the last.</q>
<q>Or he made ready for one purification, and changed his
mind for five purifications?</q> <q>None is allowed but the first
purification.</q> <q>If he said to one, <q>purify all those for thee?</q></q>
<q>None is allowed but the first.</q> <q>Purify all those for me?</q>
<q>They are all allowed.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. <q>He who fills (water of purification) with one hand, and
does work with the other hand, if he fill for himself or for
another person, or if he fill for both at once?</q> <q>Both are
disallowed, since work disallows in filling (water of purification)
whether for himself or for another.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. <q>He who puts in ashes with one hand, and does work
with the other hand?</q> <q>If it be for himself, it is disallowed;
but if it be for another person, it is allowed.</q> <q>He who while
doing work puts in ashes for himself and for another?</q> <q>His
own is disallowed, and the other's is allowed.</q> <q>He who puts
in ashes for two persons at once?</q> <q>Both are allowed.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. <q>Put in ashes for me; and I will put in ashes for thee?</q>
<q>The first case is allowed.</q> <q>Fill water for me; and I will fill
water for thee?</q> <q>The latter case is allowed.</q> <q>Put in
ashes for me, and I will fill water for thee?</q> <q>Both cases
are allowed.</q> <q>Fill water for me; and I will put in ashes for
thee?</q> <q>Both cases are disallowed.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. <q>A person filled water for his own use, and (also) for
purification?</q> <q>He fills first for himself and binds it on the
shoulder-pole; and afterward he fills that for purification.</q>
<q>And if he fill that for purification first, and afterward fill for
himself?</q> <q>It is disallowed.</q> He must put his own water
behind him, and the water for purification before him. <q>And
if he put that for purification behind him?</q> <q>It is disallowed.</q>
<q>Both are water for purification, he put one in
<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>
front and one behind him?</q> <q>It is allowed, because it is not
otherwise possible.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. <q>If one carry a rope in his hand?</q><note place='foot'>The principle laid down in
this mishna is that if one merely carried the rope for drawing the water, it was allowed
to him to do so. But if he used the rope for any work advantageous to
himself it was disallowed.</note> <q>If he go in the
(straight) way, it is allowed.</q> <q>If he go out of his way?</q>
<q>It is disallowed.</q> One went to Jabneth<note place='foot'>The modern Yebna
(Jamnia).</note> during three feasts, about this matter, and in the third feast it was
allowed to him as a decision for the time.
</p>

<p>
7. <q>If one rolled the rope round his hand?</q> <q>It is allowed;
but if he rolled it after (drawing the water), it is disallowed.</q>
Said R. José, <q>this act they allowed as a decision
for the time.</q>
</p>

<p>
8. <q>If one put aside the barrel lest it be broken, or turned
it on its mouth for the purpose of drying it, intending to fill it
with water?</q> <q>It is allowed.</q> <q>But if he did so to carry in
it ashes?</q> <q>It is disallowed.</q> If one turned out potsherds
from the trough, that it might contain more water, it is allowed;
but if they would be no hindrance to him in the time
of sprinkling, it is disallowed.
</p>

<p>
9. <q>One who had water on his shoulder, and he taught a
decision in the law or he showed the way to others or he
killed a serpent or a scorpion or he took food to put it aside?</q>
<q>It is disallowed.</q> <q>The food was for eating?</q> <q>It is allowed.</q>
<q>The serpent or scorpion hindered him?</q> <q>It is
allowed.</q> Said Rabbi Judah, <q>this is the rule: An act for
work, whether a man stood or did not stand, is disallowed;
and an act which is not for work, if he stood, is disallowed;
but if he did not stand, it is allowed.</q>
</p>

<p>
10. <q>He who handed over his water of purification to an
unclean (person)?</q> <q>It is disallowed.</q> <q>But if he handed
it to a legally clean person?</q> <q>It is allowed.</q> R. Eleazar
said, <q>even to a (person legally) unclean it is allowed, if its
owner did no work.</q>
</p>

<p>
11. <q>Two persons drew water for purification, and each
helped the other, or each took a thorn from the other?</q>
<q>For one purification it is allowed, for two purifications, it is
disallowed.</q> R. José said, <q>even for two purifications it is
allowed, if it were made a condition between them.</q>
</p>

<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>

<p>
12. <q>He who has broken (something) during drawing
water for purification with the view of preparing it afterward?</q>
<q>The water is allowed.</q> <q>But if he prepared it?</q>
<q>The water is disallowed.</q><note place='foot'>The water is disallowed, because the
man gained something for himself during the act of drawing it. His intention
was not single-minded and pure.</note> <q>He ate with the view of drying
the remainder of his food?</q> <q>The water is allowed.</q> <q>But
if he dried it?</q> <q>The water is disallowed.</q> <q>He ate and left
some, and he threw away what was left in his hand under a fig-tree,
or into the place of drying, that it might not be lost?</q>
<q>The water is disallowed.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VIII</head>

<p>
1. <q>Two persons watched a trough containing water for
purification; one of them becomes legally unclean?</q> <q>It is
allowed, because it was in the safe-keeping of the second.</q>
<q>He became clean and the second unclean?</q> <q>It is allowed,
because it was in the safe-keeping of the first.</q> <q>Both became
unclean at once?</q> <q>It is disallowed.</q> <q>One of them
did work?</q> <q>It is allowed, because it was in the safe-keeping
of the second.</q> <q>He stood still, and the second did
work?</q> <q>It is allowed, because it was in the safe-keeping
of the first.</q> <q>Both worked at once.</q> <q>It is disallowed.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. If one put ashes in the water for purification, he must
not put on his sandal, for if the water fall on the sandal, it becomes
legally unclean, and renders him legally unclean. This
is the proverb, <q>What makes thee unclean, cannot make me
unclean, but thou canst make me unclean.</q> <q>If water fall on
his flesh?</q> <q>He is clean.</q> <q>If it fall on his garment?</q> <q>It
becomes unclean, and renders him unclean.</q> This is the
proverb, <q>What makes thee unclean, cannot make me unclean,
but thou canst make me unclean.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. He who burned the red heifer and the bullocks,<note place='foot'>Lev. iv. 12,
21.</note> and he who sent forth the scapegoat, render garments unclean. The
heifer and the bullocks, and the scapegoat which was sent
forth, cannot of themselves render garments unclean. This
is the proverb: <q>What makes thee unclean, cannot make me
unclean, but thou canst make me unclean.</q>
</p>

<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>

<p>
4. If one eat from the carcass of a clean bird, as it is in his
throat, it renders garments unclean. The carcass itself does
not render garments unclean. This is the proverb: <q>What
makes thee unclean, cannot make me unclean, but thou canst
make me unclean.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. Every<note place='foot'>Primary uncleanness arises from touching a dead body,
leprosy, etc. Secondary uncleanness arises from touching one who had primary
uncleanness.</note> secondary uncleanness does not render vessels
unclean, but fluid does so. If fluid become unclean, it renders
vessels unclean. This is the proverb, <q>What makes thee
unclean, cannot make me unclean, but thou canst make me
unclean.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. Earthen vessels cannot render each other unclean, but
fluid does so. If fluid becomes unclean, it renders vessels unclean.
This is the proverb, <q>What makes thee unclean, cannot
make me unclean, but thou canst make me unclean.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. Everything<note place='foot'>A tertiary uncleanness follows from contact with
secondary uncleanness.</note> which disallows the heave-offering renders
the fluid unclean so as to be a primary uncleanness, for rendering
a person unclean, and disallowing him, except he was one
who washed by day.<note place='foot'>That is one over whom evening had
not yet come, nor was his offering yet made. Lev. xxii. 6, 7.</note> This is the
proverb, <q>What makes thee unclean, cannot make me unclean, but thou canst make me
unclean.</q>
</p>

<p>
8. All seas are reckoned for a pool of purification, as is said,
<q>And the gathering together of the waters called He seas,</q><note place='foot'>Gen.
i. 10.</note> the words of R. Meier. R. Judah said, <q>the great sea is as a
purifying-pool; it is not said seas, but there is in it many kinds
of seas.</q> R. José said, <q>all seas may purify in flowing, but
they are disallowed for issues, and leprosies, and for purifying
with them the water of the ashes of the red heifer.</q>
</p>

<p>
9. Waters with a nickname are disallowed. These are the
nicknames&mdash;<q>salt</q> and <q>lukewarm.</q> Deceitful<note place='foot'>Isa. lviii.
11.</note> waters are disallowed. These are deceitful waters&mdash;they failed once in
seven years, they failed during war and during famine&mdash;yet
they are allowed. R. Judah <q>disallows them.</q>
</p>

<p>
10. The waters of Kirmion (Kishon?), and the waters of
Pygah (Belus?) are disallowed, because they are the waters of
marshes. The waters of the Jordan and the waters of Jarmuk<note place='foot'>The river
Jarmuk is the Hieromax of the Greeks. It falls into the Jordan
about four miles below the Lake of Tiberias. The Arabs now call it the
Sheriat el Mandhûr.</note>
<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>
are disallowed, because they are mixed. And these are
mixed waters, one allowed and one disallowed are mixed.
Two which are allowed and mixed, are allowed. R. Judah
<q>disallows them.</q>
</p>

<p>
11. <q>The well of Ahab<note place='foot'>The well of Ahab is supposed by
some to be the source of a river near Beirut. This supposition is, however,
very doubtful.</note> and the cave of Panias<note place='foot'>The modern Banias, one of
the sources of the Jordan. It is situated under Mount Hermon, close to the remains
of the ancient Cæsarea Philippi.</note> are
allowed. Water which changed, but changed of itself, is allowed.
A well of water which came from a distance is allowed,
only it must be watched, that no man check it.</q> R. Judah said,
<q>it is taken for granted and allowed.</q> <q>A well into which
earth or clay fell?</q> <q>One must wait till it clear,</q> the words
of R. Ishmael. R. Akiba said, <q>there is no need of waiting.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IX</head>

<p>
1. <q>A pan full of the water of purification into which ordinary
water, however little, has fallen?</q> R. Eliezer said,
<q>one must sprinkle twice with it.</q> But the Sages <q>disallow
it.</q> <q>If dew fell into it?</q> R. Eliezer said, <q>let him leave it
in the sun, and the dew evaporates.</q> But the Sages <q>disallow
it.</q> <q>If fluid has fallen into it, or fruit juice?</q> <q>Let
him pour it out, and it is necessary to dry it.</q> Ink, gum, and
vitriol, and everything which can be remarked, must be poured
out, and there is no necessity to dry it.
</p>

<p>
2. <q>If insects and worms have fallen in and burst or
changed their appearance?</q> <q>The water is disallowed.</q> A
black beetle, though not burst nor changed, disallows it, since
it is like a pipe. Rabbi Simon and R. Eliezer, the son of
Jacob, said, <q>the wheat-worm and the grain-worm are allowed,
because there is no matter in them.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. <q>If a beast or animal drink of it?</q> <q>They disallow it.</q>
All fowls disallow it, excepting the dove, because it sucks.
All creeping animals do not disallow it, excepting the weasel,
because it laps. Rabban Gamaliel said, <q>also the serpent, because
it spews.</q> R. Eliezer said, <q>also the mouse.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. <q>If one think to drink the water of purification?</q> R.
<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>
Eliezer said, <q>it is disallowed.</q> R. Joshua said, <q>when he
drew it (toward him).</q> R. José said, <q>of what are they talking,
of water in which there are no ashes.</q> <q>But of water in
which there are ashes?</q> R. Eliezer said, <q>when he drew it
(toward him).</q> R. Joshua said, <q>when he drinks.</q> But if it
be poured into his throat, it is allowed.
</p>

<p>
5. Water of purification which is disallowed, must not be
kneaded in mortar, lest it bring misfortune to others. R.
Judah said, <q>it is worthless.</q> <q>A cow which drank water of
purification?</q> <q>Her flesh is unclean for twenty-four
hours.</q><note place='foot'>Literally, <q>from time to time.</q></note>
R. Judah said, <q>it becomes worthless in her intestines.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. The water of purification and the ashes of purification
must not be passed over a river even in a boat, nor may they
be floated on the surface of water. Nor may one stand on
one side and throw them to the other side. But one may
pass with them through water, which is up to his neck. He
who is cleansed for purification, may pass over water with
empty vessels in his hand cleansed for purification, and with
water in which there are no ashes.
</p>

<p>
7. <q>Ashes which are allowed for purification, when they are
mixed in ordinary ashes?</q> <q>We must follow the majority<note place='foot'>The meaning
is, that if the greater part of the ashes be legal, purification
would follow; but if the greater part be ordinary ashes, there would be no
purification.</note> (in reference to uncleanness) and they do not purify with
them.</q> Rabbi Eleazar said, <q>they may purify with them all.</q>
</p>

<p>
8. Water intended for purification which was disallowed,
renders unclean (him who was) cleansed for the heave-offering
in his hands and body, but it does not render unclean him
who was cleansed for purification, either in his hands or in his
body. <q>If it were rendered unclean?</q> <q>It renders unclean
(him who was) cleansed for the heave-offering in his hands
and in his body, but (him who was) cleansed for purification it
renders unclean, in his hands, but not in his body.</q>
</p>

<p>
9. Ashes which are allowed when put on the surface of
water, which is unsuitable for purification, render unclean
him who was cleansed for the heave-offering in his hands and
body, but it does not render unclean him who was cleansed
for purification, either in his hands or in his body.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter X</head>

<p>
1. Everything suited for causing legal uncleanness in that
which is trodden must be expelled from the ceremony of purification,
whether it be unclean or clean, and man likewise.
<q>Everything suited for producing defilement of the dead,
whether it be unclean or clean?</q> R. Eliezer said, <q>it is not
expelled.</q> R. Joshua said, <q>it is expelled.</q> But the Sages
say, <q>if unclean it is expelled, but the clean thing is not expelled.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. He who is cleansed for purification, when he touches
that which is expelled, is unclean. A jug for purification,
when it touches that which is expelled, is unclean. He who is
cleansed for purification, when he touches eatable or drinkable
things with his hand, is unclean. <q>But with his foot?</q> <q>He
is clean.</q> <q>The thing was moved with his hand?</q> R. Joshua
pronounces him <q>unclean</q>; but the Sages pronounce him
<q>clean.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. <q>An earthen vessel for purification, which touched a
creeping thing?</q> <q>It is clean.</q> <q>It was placed upon it?</q>
R. Eleazar pronounces it <q>clean</q>; but the Sages pronounce
it <q>unclean.</q> <q>It touched eatable or drinkable things or holy
writings?</q> <q>It is clean.</q> <q>It was placed upon them?</q> R.
José pronounced it <q>clean</q>; but the Sages pronounced it
<q>unclean.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. <q>When he who was cleansed for purification touched a
fireplace<note place='foot'>The dispute is now about what constitutes <q>a clean
place.</q></note> with his hand?</q> <q>He is unclean.</q> <q>But with
his foot?</q> <q>He is clean.</q> <q>He stood on the fireplace, and
stretched his hand with the jug, and the water and ashes in
it beyond the fireplace, and also the shoulder-pole, which he
placed over the fireplace, and on it were two earthen vessels,
one on either side?</q> R. Akiba pronounces him <q>clean</q>;<note place='foot'>Heb. ix.
13, 14.</note> but the Sages pronounce him <q>unclean.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. <q>He stood outside the fireplace, and stretched his hand
to the window, and took the jug (with water and ashes) and
passed it over the fireplace?</q> R. Akiba pronounces him
<q>unclean,</q> but the Sages pronounce him <q>clean.</q> But he
who was cleansed for purification, may stand over the fireplace,
<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>
and in his hand an empty vessel cleansed for purification
or (one) with water without ashes.
</p>

<p>
6. <q>When a jug for purification touched (one) in which
there were holy things, or one in which there was a heave-offering?</q>
<q>The one for purification is unclean; but those
of the holy things and the heave-offering are clean.</q> <q>If
both be in his two hands?</q> <q>Both are unclean.</q> <q>If both
be in two papers?</q> <q>Both are clean.</q> <q>If the one for purification
be in paper, and the one for the heave-offering be in
his hand?</q> <q>Both are unclean.</q> <q>If the one for the heave-offering
be in paper, and the one for purification be in his
hand?</q> <q>Both are clean.</q> R. Joshua said, <q>the one for the
purification is unclean.</q> <q>They were placed on the ground
and one touched them?</q> <q>The one for purification is unclean,
the one containing the holy things, and the one with the
heave-offering are clean.</q> <q>He moved them?</q> R. Joshua
pronounces them <q>unclean,</q> but the Sages pronounce them
<q>clean.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XI</head>

<p>
1. <q>A pan for purification which one left open, and he
found it covered?</q> <q>It is disallowed.</q> <q>He left it open
and found a covering on it?</q> <q>If a weasel could drink of
it, or a serpent, according to the words of Rabban Gamaliel,
or there fell in it dew by night, it is disallowed.</q> Water with
ashes cannot be saved (from legal impurity) by the covering<note place='foot'>Num. xix.
15.</note> bound upon it. And water in which there are no ashes, is
saved by the covering bound upon it.
</p>

<p>
2. Every doubt implies cleanness in the heave-offering and
cleanness in purification. Every reason for suspense in the
heave-offering causes pouring away of the water in purification.
If acts requiring legal cleanness be afterward performed,
they are in suspense. Shallow water<note place='foot'>Maimonides translates
<q>lattice-work.</q></note> is clean for holy things, and the
heave-offering and purification. R. Eleazar said, <q>trickling
water<note place='foot'>Or trelliswork.</note> is unclean for purification.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. <q>A dried fig of the heave-offering which has fallen into
water for purification, and one has taken it out and eaten it?</q>
<q>If it be the size of an egg, whether it be unclean or clean,
<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>
the water is unclean, and he who ate it is guilty of death.</q> R.
José said, <q>if it be clean the water is clean.</q> He who was
cleansed for the sin-offering, and afterward put his head and
the greater part of his body into water of purification, is unclean.
</p>

<p>
4. Everyone charged by the words of the Law to enter
water, renders unclean holy things, and the heave-offering and
ordinary things and the tithe, and is prevented from entering
the temple. <q>After entering (the water) he renders unclean
holy things, and disallows the heave-offering,</q> the words of
R. Meier, but the Sages say, <q>he disallows holy things and
the heave-offering, but he is permitted in ordinary things and
tithes, and if he came to the temple, whether before or after
entering (water), he is a debtor (to the Law).</q>
</p>

<p>
5. <q>Everyone charged by the words of the Scribes to enter
water, renders unclean holy things, and disallows the heave-offering,
but allows ordinary things and the tithes,</q> the
words of R. Meier; but the Sages <q>disallow him in tithes.</q>
After his entering (water) he is permitted in all these. And
if he come to the temple whether before or after entering
water, he is free.
</p>

<p>
6. Everyone charged to enter water, whether by the words
of the Law or the words of the Scribes, renders unclean the
water for purification and the ashes for purification, and the
sprinkler of the water of purification, by touching or lifting.
<q>The hyssop, and the water without ashes, and empty vessels
cleansed for purification (render unclean), by touching or
lifting,</q> the words of R. Meier; but the Sages say, <q>by touching,
but not by lifting.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. All hyssop which has a distinctive name is forbidden,
simple hyssop is allowed; Grecian hyssop, colored hyssop,
Roman hyssop, desert hyssop, are forbidden, and that of the
unclean heave-offering is forbidden, but if it were of the clean
(heave-offering) one should not sprinkle with it, but if one
sprinkled with it, it is allowed. Men must not sprinkle with
the sprouts or the berries of hyssop. When sprinkled with
the sprouts, they are not prevented from entering the temple.
R. Eliezer said, <q>not even with the berries.</q> These are
sprouts&mdash;stalks which have not ripened.
</p>

<p>
8. Hyssop used for sprinkling is allowed to cleanse the
<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>
leper. <q>If one gathered it for wood, and fluid fell on it?</q>
<q>He may dry it, and it is allowed.</q> <q>If one gathered it for
food, and fluid fell on it?</q> <q>Even though he dried it, it is
disallowed.</q> <q>If one gathered it for purification?</q> <q>It is
reckoned as food,</q> the words of R. Meier. R. Judah and R.
José and R. Simon say, <q>it is reckoned as wood.</q>
</p>

<p>
9. The order of the hyssop (requires) three roots, and in
them three stalks. R. Judah said, <q>to every root three
stalks.</q> Hyssop which has three roots is to be separated and
bound; if separated and not bound, if bound and not separated,
if neither separated nor bound, it is allowed. R. José
said, <q>the order of the hyssop is three roots and in them three
stalks, and if there remain over from sprinkling two, and their
fibres however small, they are allowed.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XII</head>

<p>
1. Short hyssop is made sufficient for sprinkling with a
thread and spindle, and it is dipped and lifted, and one holds
the hyssop and sprinkles. R. Judah and R. Simon say, <q>as is
the rule for sprinkling with the hyssop, so is the dipping with
the hyssop</q> (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, in holding it).
</p>

<p>
2. <q>If one sprinkled and there is a doubt if the water with
ashes came from the thread, or a doubt if it came from the
spindle, or a doubt if it came from the stalk?</q> <q>His sprinkling
is disallowed.</q> <q>If he sprinkled on two vessels, there
is a doubt; if he sprinkled on both, there is a doubt that the
sprinkling splashed from one to the other?</q> <q>His sprinkling
is disallowed.</q> <q>A needle is placed on a potsherd, and he
sprinkled it, there is a doubt if he sprinkled on the needle,
there is a doubt if the sprinkling splashed from the potsherd
upon it?</q> <q>His sprinkling is disallowed.</q> <q>A pan for
purification with a narrow mouth?</q> <q>He is to dip the hyssop
in and lift it out as usual.</q> R. Judah says, <q>the first sprinkling
(is allowed).</q> <q>The water of purification which became
diminished?</q> <q>One may dip in even the tops of the stalks
and sprinkle, except that he should not dry up the vessel.</q>
<q>His intention<note place='foot'>This doctrine of intention has also
been adopted into the system of Romanism. The Council of Trent (Session vii.
Canon xi.) teaches that <q>Whoever shall affirm that when ministers perform
and confer a sacrament, it is not necessary that they should have at least the
intention to do what the Church does; let him be accursed.</q> It follows, that
if, for example, in the sacrament of orders, any bishop in any age failed in
due intention, all the orders which flowed from him are invalid.</note> was to
sprinkle before him, and he sprinkled
<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>
behind him; to sprinkle behind him, and he sprinkled before
him?</q> <q>His sprinkling is disallowed.</q> <q>Before him, and he
sprinkled sidewise in front?</q> <q>His sprinkling is allowed.</q>
He may sprinkle a man whether he be aware of it or not. He
may sprinkle a man, or vessels, even should they be 100.
</p>

<p>
3. <q>His intention was to sprinkle on anything which can
receive defilement, and he sprinkled on a thing which cannot
receive defilement?</q> <q>If there remain (water) in the hyssop
he must not repeat it.</q> <q>His intention was to sprinkle on
something which does not receive defilement, and he sprinkled
on something which does receive defilement?</q> <q>If there remain
(water) in the hyssop, he may repeat it.</q> <q>If upon man,
and he sprinkled on a beast?</q> <q>If there remain (water) in the
hyssop, he must not repeat it.</q> <q>Upon beast and he sprinkled
on man?</q> <q>If there be (water) in the hyssop he may repeat
it.</q> Water which has dropped from the hyssop is allowed, because it
renders everything unclean like the water of purification.<note place='foot'>Chap. ix.
9; viii. 5.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. He who sprinkled from a public window and entered
the sanctuary, and the water was afterward found (to be) disallowed,
is free. He who sprinkled from a private window
and entered the sanctuary, and the water was afterward found
(to be) disallowed, is a debtor. But the high-priest, whether
he sprinkled from a private, or from a public window, is free,
since no high-priest is indebted (for an offering) on his entering
the sanctuary. Persons were slipping in water of purification
before a public window, and treading in it and were not
hindered, because the (Sages) say, <q>the water of purification,
which has done its duty, causes no uncleanness.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. A clean man who took the axe of one legally unclean
by the handle,<note place='foot'>Another rendering is, <q>in his garment.</q></note> and
sprinkled it, even though there be so much
water upon it as is sufficient for sprinkling, is clean. <q>How
much water is sufficient for sprinkling?</q> <q>Sufficient that
the tops of the stalks of hyssop be dipped and sprinkled.</q> R.
Judah said, <q>we regard them as though the hyssop were
copper.</q>
</p>

<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>

<p>
6. <q>He who sprinkled with unclean hyssop?</q> <q>If it be
the size of an egg, the water is disallowed, and the sprinkling
is disallowed.</q> <q>If it be not the size of an egg?</q> <q>The
water is allowed, but the sprinkling is disallowed, and he
who is sprinkled renders his companion unclean, and he again
his companion, even though there be 100.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. He who was cleansed for purification, if his hands became
unclean, his body is unclean, and he renders his companion
unclean, and he again his companion, even though there be
100.
</p>

<p>
8. A jug for purification, which became unclean on the outside,
becomes unclean inside, and renders unclean the one next
to it, and it again the next one, even though they be 100. The
bell and its clapper are reckoned as one. The spindle for bulrushes
is not to be sprinkled either on the spindle or on the
ring. But if it be sprinkled, it is sprinkled. If it be a spindle
for flax, its parts are all reckoned as one. The skin which
covers a couch which is joined to rings, is reckoned as one
with it. The canopy is neither reckoned for uncleanness or
cleanness. All handles of vessels which enter them are reckoned
as one with them. Rabbi Jochanan, the son of Nuri,
said, <q>even if they be only attached.</q>
</p>

<p>
9. The panniers of an ass, and the staff of the threshing-wagon,
and the pole of a bier, and the horn vessels of travellers,
and a chain for keys, and the stitch-hooks of washers,
and a garment sewed with a mixture of wool and linen, are
reckoned as one for uncleanness, but not reckoned as one
for sprinkling.
</p>

<p>
10. <q>The cover of a kettle which is bound by a chain?</q>
The school of Shammai say, <q>it is reckoned as one for uncleanness,
but not reckoned as one for sprinkling.</q> The
school of Hillel say, <q>he sprinkled the kettle, he sprinkled
the cover; he sprinkled the cover, he did not sprinkle the
kettle.</q> All are permitted to sprinkle, except a neuter and
a woman, and a child without understanding. A woman
may help a man when he sprinkles, and she may hold for him
the water. And he dips the hyssop and sprinkles. If she
take hold of his hand even in the moment of sprinkling, it is
disallowed.
</p>

<p>
11. <q>One dipped the hyssop by day and sprinkled by day?</q>
<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>
<q>It is allowed.</q> <q>He dipped the hyssop by day and sprinkled
by night, by night and sprinkled by day?</q> <q>It is disallowed.</q>
<q>By day, and sprinkled on the day following?</q>
<q>It is disallowed.</q> But he himself washed by night, and
sprinkled by day, since we do not sprinkle till the sun rise;
and everything done in sprinkling when the pillar of the morn
ascends, is allowed.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='talmud_hands'/>
<head>Hands</head>

<quote rend='display'>
Pouring Water&mdash;Vessels&mdash;Water&mdash;Who May Pour&mdash;How It Is to Be
Poured&mdash;Hindrances to
Cleanness&mdash;Doubting&mdash;Primary Uncleanness&mdash;Secondary
Uncleanness&mdash;Derived Uncleanness&mdash;Rabban Simeon,
Son of Gamaliel&mdash;Straps of Phylacteries&mdash;Rolls of the Law&mdash;Holy
Scriptures&mdash;Canticles and Ecclesiastes&mdash;Foot-baths&mdash;Ammon and
Moab&mdash;Discussion between Rabbis Eleazar, Ishmael, and Tarphon&mdash;Weeping
of R. Eleazar&mdash;An Ammonite Proselyte&mdash;Chaldee Writing&mdash;Assyrian
Writing&mdash;The Sadducees&mdash;The Books of Homer&mdash;The
Pharisees&mdash;Writing the Name.
</quote>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I</head>

<p>
1. A quarter-log<note place='foot'>A log is about half a pint.</note> of water is poured
on the hands of one person; also on the hands of two persons. Half a log on
three or four. From a log for five, ten, or even 100 (persons).
R. José says, <q>provided there be not less for the last than a
quarter-log.</q> Men may add (water) for the second washing,<note place='foot'>Before
eating ordinary food the hands must be washed once. Before
eating consecrated food they must be washed twice.</note>
but they must not add it for the first.
</p>

<p>
2. They may put water for hands in all vessels, even in vessels
of dung or vessels of stone or vessels of earth. But
they must not pour it on hands out of the (broken) sides of
vessels or the bottom of a tub or the bung of a cask. Nor
may one give it to his neighbor out of the hollow of his hand:
because they must not draw or consecrate, or sprinkle the
water of purification, or put it on hands, except it be in a vessel.
They can only preserve vessels by the covering bound<note place='foot'>Num. xix.
15.</note> upon them. Nor can they preserve from uncleanness water in open
earthen vessels,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, from the uncleanness
of a dead reptile.</note> only in (covered) vessels.
</p>

<p>
3. Water which is unfit for animals to drink, is unfit (for
washing) in vessels; but on the ground it is fit. If ink, gum,
<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>
or vitriol black drop into it, and its color be changed, it is
unfit. If one made use of it, or soaked his bread in it, it is
unfit. Simeon the Temanite said, <q>even if he intended to
soak it in one vessel and it dropped into another, it is fit.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. If one rinsed vessels in it, or rinsed out measures, it is
unfit. If one rinsed in it vessels already washed, or new ones,
it is fit. R. José <q>disallows it for new vessels.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. Water in which the baker had dipped rolls, is unfit; but
if he only dipped in his hands, it is fit. All are allowed to
pour water on hands, even one deaf, an idiot, or a minor. A
man may rest a cask between his knees and pour it. He may
incline the barrel on its side and pour it. An ape may pour
water on hands. R. José <q>disallows these two cases.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II</head>

<p>
1. <q>If one poured on his hand one gush?</q> <q>His hand is
clean.</q> <q>If on both hands one gush?</q> R. Meier pronounces
them <q>unclean, until one poured out of a quarter-log (vessel)
upon them.</q> <q>If a heave-loaf fall (on the water)?</q> <q>It is
clean.</q> R. José <q>pronounces it unclean.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. <q>If one poured out his first (ablution) in one place, and
his second in another place, and a heave-loaf fall on the first?</q>
<q>It is unclean.</q> <q>If on the second?</q> <q>It is clean.</q> <q>If
one poured out both the first and second (ablutions) into one
place, and a heave-loaf fall on them?</q> <q>It is unclean.</q> <q>If
one poured out his first ablution, and find on his hand a splinter
or small stone?</q> <q>His hands are unclean, as the second
water only purifies the first washing on the hand.</q><note place='foot'>And consequently
does not purify the place covered by the splinter or stone, which remained unwashed by the
first water.</note> R. Simon, the son of Gamaliel, says, <q>whatsoever is a creation of
the water is clean.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. The hands become legally unclean, or legally clean up
to the wrist. <q>How?</q> <q>If one poured the first (ablution)
up to the wrist, and the second above the wrist, and the water
ran back into the hand?</q> <q>It is clean.</q> <q>If one poured
the first and second (ablutions) above the wrist, and the water
ran back into the hand?</q> <q>It is unclean.</q> <q>If one poured
the first (ablution) over one hand, and afterward the second
<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>
over both hands?</q> <q>They are unclean.</q> <q>If one poured
the first (ablution) over both hands, and afterward the second
over one hand?</q> <q>His hand is clean.</q> <q>If one poured
water on one hand and then rubbed it against its fellow?</q>
<q>It is unclean.</q> <q>If he rubbed it against his head, or against
the wall?</q> <q>It is clean.</q> Men may pour water over four
or five persons alongside of each other, or above each other,
provided they be separated, so that the water can come on
them.
</p>

<p>
4. <q>There is a doubt if the water has been used, there is a
doubt if it has not been used; there is a doubt if it be the prescribed
quantity, there is a doubt if it be not the prescribed
quantity: there is a doubt if it be (legally) unclean, there is
a doubt if it be (legally) clean?</q> <q>In doubting he is clean,</q>
because the Sages said, <q>if there be a doubt of his hands being
unclean, or imparting uncleanness, or being clean, he is clean.</q>
R. José said, <q>if there be a doubt of cleanness it is uncleanness.</q>
<q>How?</q> <q>His hands are clean, and before him are
two unclean loaves, it is doubtful if he touched them, it is
doubtful if he did not touch them: his hands are unclean, and
before him are two clean loaves, it is doubtful if he touched
them, it is doubtful if he did not touch them?</q> <q>His hands
are one unclean and one clean.</q> <q>And before him are two
clean loaves: he touched one of them, it is doubtful if he
touched the unclean, it is doubtful if he touched the clean?</q>
<q>His hands are clean.</q> <q>And before him are two loaves,
one unclean and one clean, he touched one of them, it is doubtful
if he touched the unclean, it is doubtful if he touched the
clean?</q> <q>His hands are one unclean and one clean.</q> <q>And
before him are two loaves, one unclean and one clean, he
touched both of them, it is doubtful if it were the unclean (loaf)
with the unclean (hand), or the clean (loaf) with the clean
(hand), or the clean loaf with the unclean (hand), or the unclean
loaf with the clean hand?</q> <q>The hands remain as they
were, and the loaves as they were.</q><note place='foot'>Those that were
legally clean continue clean, and those legally unclean
continue unclean.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III</head>

<p>
1. <q>Whosoever puts his hands into a house smitten with
leprosy?</q> <q>His hands are unclean in a primary degree.</q><note place='foot'>His
hands render unclean what they touch.</note> The words of R. Akiba. But the Sages say,
<q>his hands are unclean in a secondary degree.</q><note place='foot'>His hands render
sacred things unclean.</note> <q>Whatever renders
garments unclean at the time of contact, renders hands unclean
in a primary degree.</q> The words of R. Akiba. But
the Sages say, <q>in a secondary degree.</q> They said to R.
Akiba, <q>where do we find the hands (unclean) in a primary
degree?</q> <q>Everywhere,</q> he said to them; <q>and how is it
possible for them to be unclean in a primary degree, unless
his body is unclean, excepting this.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>,
the putting his hands into a house infected with leprosy.</note> <q>Victuals, and vessels
which are unclean through liquids, render hands unclean in
a secondary degree.</q> The words of R. Joshua. But the Sages say,
<q>that which is unclean through a source of uncleanness,<note place='foot'>Literally
<q>father of uncleanness,</q> such as a corpse or dead reptile, etc.</note> renders the
hands unclean; but derived uncleanness<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>,
uncleanness not containing the principle of uncleanness.</note>
does not render the hands unclean.</q> Rabban Simeon,
the son of Gamaliel, said, <q>it happened that a woman came
before my father. She said to him, <q>my hands entered into
the hollow of an earthen vessel.</q> He said to her, <q>my daughter,
from what was its uncleanness?</q> But I did not hear what
she said to him.</q> The Sages said, <q>the thing is clear, that
which is unclean through a source of uncleanness renders the
hands unclean; but derived uncleanness does not render the
hands unclean.</q>
</p>

<p>
2. <q>Whatever disallows the heave-offering, renders the
hands unclean in a secondary degree. One hand can render
the other hand unclean.</q> The words of R. Joshua. But the
Sages say, <q>a secondary cannot make a secondary.</q><note place='foot'>An object
unclean in the secondary degree cannot make another unclean in
the same degree.</note> He
said to them, <q>and are not Holy Scriptures secondaries, and
they render the hands unclean?</q> They said to him, <q>we cannot
judge the words of the Law from the words of the scribes,
nor the words of the scribes from the words of the Law, nor
the words of the scribes from other words of the scribes.</q>
</p>

<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>

<p>
3. Straps of phylacteries with the phylacteries, render the
hands unclean. R. Simeon says, <q>the straps of phylacteries
do not render the hands unclean.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. The margin in a book of the Law, at the top and bottom,
at the beginning and end, renders the hands unclean. R. José
says, <q>in the end it does not render the hands unclean, until
the roller be attached.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. A book of the Law which is erased, but in which there
remain eighty-five letters like the portion, <q>And it came to
pass when the Ark set forward,</q><note place='foot'>Num. x. 35, 36. The rabbis count
these verses a distinct book of the law.</note> renders the hands unclean.
Any roll in which there are written eighty-five letters like
the portion, <q>And it came to pass when the Ark set forward,</q>
renders the hands unclean. All sacred Scriptures render the
hands unclean. The Canticles and Ecclesiastes render the
hands unclean. R. Judah says, <q>Canticles render the hands
unclean, but Ecclesiastes is in dispute.</q> R. José says,
<q>Ecclesiastes does not render the hands unclean, but the
Canticles are in dispute.</q> R. Simeon says, <q>Ecclesiastes is
one in which the school of Shammai is less strict, and the
school of Hillel more rigid.</q> R. Simeon, the son of Azai, said,
<q>I received by tradition from the mouths of the seventy-two
elders, on the day they inducted R. Eleazar, the son of Azariah,
into the president's seat, that Canticles and Ecclesiastes render
the hands unclean.</q> R. Akiba said, <q>God forbid! no man
in Israel ever questioned that the Canticles render the hands
unclean, as the whole world is not equal to the day on which
the Canticles were given to Israel; for all the Scriptures are
holy, but the Canticles are Holy of Holies. They only disputed
in reference to Ecclesiastes.</q> R. Jochanan, the son
of Joshua, the son of R. Akiba's father-in-law, said, <q>according
to the words of the son of Azai, thus they disputed, and
thus they decided.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>

<div>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV</head>

<p>
1. On that day<note place='foot'>When R. Eleazar, the son of Azariah, was made
president of the school in Jamnia.</note> they voted and decided, <q>that a foot-bath
containing from two logs to nine cabs,<note place='foot'>A cab is about three
pints.</note> which was split,<note place='foot'>And could not contain water enough
to wash one foot.</note> may become unclean from pressure,</q><note place='foot'>Of an
unclean person.</note> although R. Akiba says, <q>that a foot-bath is as its
name.</q><note place='foot'>It continues as long as its name, and as such
cannot become unclean from pressure.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. On that day they said, <q>that all sacrifices offered without
due intention are allowed, but they do not absolve the
owners from their obligation, except the passover-offering,
and the sin-offering&mdash;the passover-offering in its time, and
the sin-offering at all times.</q> R. Eleazar says, <q>also the
trespass-offering, the passover-offering in its time, and the
sin or trespass-offering at all times.</q> R. Simeon, the son of
Azai, said, <q>I received it by tradition from the mouth of the
seventy-two elders, on the day they inducted R. Eleazar, the son
of Azariah, into the president's seat, that all sacrifices offered
without due intention, are allowed, but they do not absolve
the owners from their obligation, except the passover-offering,
and the sin-offering.</q> The son of Azai only added the burnt-offering,
but the Sages did not agree with him.
</p>

<p>
3. On that day they said, <q>how is it with Ammon and
Moab<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, with Israelites dwelling
there.</note> in the Sabbatical year?</q> R. Tarphon decided <q>they
must pay tithes for the poor</q>;<note place='foot'>Tithe for the poor could be eaten
anywhere.</note> but R. Eleazar, son of Azariah,
decided <q>second tithes.</q><note place='foot'>Second tithes could only be eaten in
Jerusalem. Deut. xiv. 22, 23.</note> R. Ishmael then said, <q>Eleazar,
son of Azariah, it behoves thee to prove it, for thou addest
to the burden (of the Law); and whoever adds to the burden
(of the Law) it behoves him to prove it.</q> R. Eleazar, son
of Azariah, said to him, <q>Ishmael, my brother, I have not
changed from the order of the years,<note place='foot'>The sixth year was fixed for the
tithe to the poor, consequently in countries outside the land of Israel, and not
subject to the Sabbatical rest, Israelites should pay the second tithe.</note> but
my brother Tarphon has changed, therefore it behoves him to prove it.</q> R.
Tarphon replied, <q>Egypt is out of the land, and Ammon and
Moab are out of the land: as Egypt pays tithes for the poor
in the Sabbatical year, so Ammon and Moab pay tithes for
<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>
the poor in the Sabbatical year.</q> R. Eleazar, son of Azariah,
replied: <q>Babylon is out of the land, and Ammon and Moab
are out of the land; even as Babylon pays second tithes in
the Sabbatical year, so Ammon and Moab pay second tithes
in the Sabbatical year.</q> R. Tarphon replied, <q>Egypt being
near, is subject to tithes for the poor, in order that the poor
in Israel may be supported in the Sabbatical year; so
Ammon and Moab, which are near, must also be subject
to tithes for the poor, in order that the poor in Israel
may be supported in the Sabbatical year.</q> R. Eleazar, the
son of Azariah, replied, <q>thou seekest to increase money,
but thou only losest souls; wouldest thou be the cause that
heaven should neither send down dew nor rain, as is said,
<q>Will a man rob God?</q> Yet ye have robbed me. But ye
say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings.</q><note place='foot'>Mal.
iii. 8. It is assumed that the prophet means the consecrated second
tithe, and not the unconsecrated tithe for the poor.</note>
R. Joshua said, <q>Behold I will answer for my brother
Tarphon, but not according to the sense of his words&mdash;Egypt
is a new arrangement, Babylon is an old arrangement; the
judgment before us is a new arrangement. Let the new
arrangement be judged from the new arrangement, but let
not a new arrangement be judged from an old arrangement.
Egypt is an arrangement by the elders (of the Sanhedrin),
but Babylon is an arrangement by the prophets&mdash;the judgment
before us is an arrangement by the elders. Let therefore the
arrangement by the elders be judged from an arrangement by
the elders; but let not an arrangement by the elders be judged
from an arrangement by prophets.</q> They voted and decided
<q>that Ammon and Moab must pay tithes for the poor in the
Sabbatical year.</q> When R. José, son of Dormiskith, came
to R. Eleazar at Lydda, he said to him, <q>what had you new
in the college to-day?</q> He answered, <q>they voted and decided
that Ammon and Moab must pay tithes in the Sabbatical
year.</q> R. Eleazar wept and said, <q><q>The secret of the LORD
is with them that fear him; and He will show them His covenant.</q><note place='foot'>Ps.
xxv. 10.</note> Go and tell them, be not anxious about your vote,
for I received it by tradition from Rabban Jochanan, the son
of Zachai, who heard it from his teacher, up to the decision
<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>
of Moses from Sinai, that Ammon and Moab must pay tithes
to the poor, in the Sabbatical year.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. On that day came Judah, an Ammonitish proselyte, and
stood before them in the college. He said to them, <q>How
am I to come into the congregation?</q> Rabban Gamaliel
said to him, <q>thou art forbidden.</q> R. Joshua said to him,
<q>thou art allowed.</q> Rabban Gamaliel said, <q>the Scripture
says, <q>An Ammonite or Moabite shall not enter into the
congregation of the LORD; even to their tenth generation,
etc.</q></q><note place='foot'>Deut. xxiii. 3.</note> To him said R. Joshua, <q>Are then
the Ammonites or Moabites still in their own land? Sennacherib, King of
Assyria, aforetime came up, and commingled the nations, as
is said, <q>And I have removed the bounds of the people, and
have robbed their treasures, and I have put down the inhabitants
like a valiant (<emph>man</emph>).</q></q><note place='foot'>Isa. x. 13.</note> Rabban
Gamaliel said to him, <q>the Scripture says, <q>And afterward I will bring again
the captivity of the children of Ammon</q>;<note place='foot'>Jer. xlix. 6.</note> and
they are already returned.</q> To him said R. Joshua, <q>the Scripture says, <q>And
I will bring again the captivity of my people of Israel,<note place='foot'>Amos ix.
14.</note> and Judah.</q> But they are not yet returned.</q> And they allowed
him to come into the congregation.
</p>

<p>
4. The Chaldee passages in Ezra and Daniel render the
hands unclean. Chaldee written in Hebrew, and Hebrew
written in Chaldee, or in Hebrew,<note place='foot'>The ancient Hebrew letters are now
called Samaritan. They are still used for writing by the small community of
Samaritans who dwell in Nablus, in the Holy Land. The Jews now use the
Chaldee characters; and the Talmud therefore errs in calling the old national
letters Assyrian.</note> do not render the hands
unclean. In no case do they cause uncleanness, unless the
writing be Assyrian, on parchment with ink.
</p>

<p>
5. The Sadducees said, <q>we blame you Pharisees, because
you say sacred Scriptures render the hands unclean, but the
books Hameram<note place='foot'>Some suppose the writings of Homer
are meant; others think that these were books against revealed religion.</note>
do not render the hands unclean.</q> Rabban
Jochanan, the son of Zachai, said, <q>and have we nothing else
against the Pharisees but this? Behold they say, <q>that the
bones of an ass are clean, but the bones of Jochanan the high-priest
are unclean.</q></q> They said to him, <q>according to their
value is their uncleanness, so that no one may make the bones
of his father and mother into spoons.</q> He said to them, <q>so
<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>
(are) the sacred Scriptures: according to their value is their
uncleanness. The books Hameram, which are not valued, do
not render the hands unclean.</q>
</p>

<p>
6. The Sadducees said, <q>we blame you Pharisees, that you
declare the stream flowing (from a clean into an unclean vessel)
to be clean.</q> The Pharisees said, <q>we blame you Sadducees,
that you declare a stream of water flowing from a
graveyard to be clean.</q> The Sadducees said, <q>we blame you
Pharisees, because you say, if my ox or my ass cause damage,
we are responsible; but if my slave or my bondwoman cause
damage, we are free. What! if I be responsible for my ox
and my ass, for which I have no obligation, I am bound for
my slave or bondwoman for whom I have obligation. It is
just that I should be bound for their damages.</q> They said
to them <q>no! if you speak of my ox and my ass which have
no knowledge, as you speak of my slave and bondwoman who
have knowledge: then, if I offend them, they may go and set
fire to the stacks of corn of another, and I should be bound
to pay.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. A Galilean Sadducee said, <q>I blame you Pharisees, because
you write the name of the reigning sovereign in the
letter of divorce with Moses.</q> The Pharisees said, <q>we blame
you Galilean Sadducee, that you write the sovereign on the
same page with the NAME, and not only so, but you write
the sovereign above, and the name below, as is said, <q>And
Pharaoh said, <q>Who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice
to let Israel go?</q></q></q><note place='foot'>Exod. v. 2. The name of Pharaoh
cannot be considered an insult to Moses, since it precedes the name of God.</note>
But when he was punished, what did he
say? <q>The LORD is righteous.</q><note place='foot'>Exod. ix. 27. This is merely added
to avoid ending with Pharaoh's blasphemy.</note>
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Kabbalah Unveiled: The Lesser Holy Assembly</head>
<head type='sub'>Translated by S. L. Macgregor Mathers</head>

<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter I'/>
<head>Chapter I: Which Containeth the Introduction</head>

<p>
Tradition.&mdash;On that day on which the Companions were assembled
together in the house of Rabbi Schimeon, and on which
he had arranged his affairs because he was about to depart from
the world, before him were Rabbi Eleazar his son, and Rabbi
Abba, and the rest of the Companions; and the house was full.
</p>

<p>
Therefore lifting up his eyes, Rabbi Schimeon saw that the
house was full. And Rabbi Schimeon wept, saying: <q rend='pre'>The
second time when I was sick, and Rabbi Benchas Ben Yair was
in my presence, and until I had chosen my place, life hath been
prolonged unto me even until now.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>When I was restored, fire surrounded (my habitation)
which hitherto hath never ceased, neither did any man enter in
unto me without permission.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But now I see that it is taken away, and that the house is
filled.</q>
</p>

<p>
While they were sitting down, Rabbi Schimeon, opening his
eyes, beheld a certain vision, and lo! fire surrounded the
house!
</p>

<p>
Therefore all (the others) went forth, and Rabbi Eleazar his
son, and Rabbi Abba remained; but the other Companions sat
without.
</p>

<p>
Rabbi Schimeon said unto Rabbi Eleazar his son: <q rend='pre'>Go forth,
and see whether Rabbi Yitzchaq be present for whom I have
made myself surety.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And say thou unto him that he dispose his affairs, and that
he may sit down with me. Blessed is his portion.</q>
</p>

<p>
Rabbi Schimeon arose and again sat down; and he laughed
aloud, and rejoicing said, <q>Where are the companions?</q>
</p>

<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>

<p>
Rabbi Eleazar arose and introduced them, and they sat down
in his presence.
</p>

<p>
Rabbi Schimeon lifted up his hands and prayed a prayer,
and was joyful.
</p>

<p>
And he said, <q>Let those Companions who were in the former
Conclave<note place='foot'>That is, who had formed part of the Greater Holy
Assembly</note> assembled here.</q>
</p>

<p>
Therefore, all the others having gone forth, there remained
Rabbi Eleazar his son, and Rabbi Abba, and Rabbi Yehudah,
and Rabbi Yosi Bar Yoqeb, and Rabbi Chiya.
</p>

<p>
In the meantime Rabbi Yitzchaq entered, to whom Rabbi
Schimeon said: <q>How excellent is thy lot! How much joy is
this day stored up for thee!</q>
</p>

<p>
Rabbi Abba sat down behind his (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, Rabbi Schimeon's)
back, and Rabbi Eleazar before him (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, Rabbi Schimeon).
</p>

<p>
Rabbi Schimeon spake and said: <q rend='pre'>Surely now is the time
of benevolence, and I desire to enter without confusion into
the world to come.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And verily these sacred things, which hereunto have never
been revealed, I desire to reveal before the Schekhinah;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Lest they should say that I have kept back anything, and
that I have been taken away from the world; for even until now
these things have been concealed in my heart, so that having
entered into these very matters I may be with them in the world
to come.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But this is my arrangement of you; let Rabbi Abba write,
and let Rabbi Eleazar my son speak openly; but let the rest of
the Companions in silence meditate in their heart.</q>
</p>

<p>
Rabbi Abba arose from his seat behind him, and Rabbi Eleazar
his son sat down.
</p>

<p>
He said unto him, <q>Arise, O my son, for another shall sit
in that seat</q>; and Rabbi Eleazar arose.
</p>

<p>
Rabbi Schimeon covered himself and sat down; and he commenced,
and said, Ps. cxv. 17: <q rend='pre'><q>The dead shall not praise
IH, <hi rend='italic'>Yah</hi>, nor all they who go down into silence!</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>The dead shall not praise Yah;</q> so it is certain that it is
assuredly those who are called dead; for He, God, the most
Holy One&mdash;may He be blessed!&mdash;is called the Living One, and
is Himself commemorated among those who are called living,
and not with those who are called dead.</q>
</p>

<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And the end of this text runneth thus: <q>Nor all they who
go down into silence;</q> for all they who go down into silence remain
in Gehenna.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>There is another reason appertaining to those who are
called living, for God the most Holy One&mdash;may He be blessed!&mdash;desireth
their glory.</q>
</p>

<p>
Rabbi Schimeon said: <q rend='pre'>How different is this occasion from
that of the former conclave! For into a certain conclave<note place='foot'>Meaning that
the Greater Holy Assembly had been as it were the reflection
of the conclave of the Sephiroth above. The word used for <q>chariot</q>
is not <q>Mercavah,</q> but <q>Rethikh.</q></note> came
He, the most Holy and Blessed God, and His Chariot.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Now verily He, the Holy One, is here&mdash;may He be blessed&mdash;and
He hath approached with those Just who are in the
Garden of Eden,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, the Paradise
above.</note> which did not occur in the former conclave.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And God, the Most Holy One&mdash;may He be blessed&mdash;more
promoteth the glory of the Just than His own glory.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>As it is written concerning Jeroboam, who sacrificed unto
and served other gods, and yet God, the Most Holy One&mdash;may
He be blessed!&mdash;waited for him.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>But because he stretched forth his hand against Iddo the
prophet, his hand became withered.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>For it is written, 1 Kings xiii. 4, <q>And his hand became
withered, etc.</q> Here it is not written that it was because he
served other gods, but because he extended his hand against
Iddo the prophet, etc.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Now, therefore, God the Most Holy One&mdash;may He be
blessed!&mdash;promoteth their glory (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, that of the Just), and
they all come with Him.</q>
</p>

<p>
He said, <q rend='pre'>Verily, Rav Hamenuna the elder is here, and
around him are seventy Just represented in his circle, of whom
certain shine with the splendor of the Ancient and Most Holy
One, the Concealed with all Concealments.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>He, I say, cometh, in order that with joy he may hear those
words which I shall speak.</q><note place='foot'>In the original both this and the
foregoing section, apparently by an oversight, have the number thirty-three
attached to them.</note>
</p>

<p>
And when he had sat down he said: <q>Assuredly here a seat
hath been set aside for Rabbi Benchas Ben Yair.</q>
</p>

<p>
The companions who were there trembled greatly, and they
arose, and sat down in the lowest part of the house; but Rabbi
Eleazar and Rabbi Abba (still sat) before Rabbi Schimeon.
</p>

<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>

<p>
Rabbi Schimeon said: <q rend='pre'>In the former Assembly we acted
thus; namely, that all the companions spoke, and I also with
them, by turns.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Now I shall speak alone, and let all hear my words, superiors
and inferiors; blessed be my portion this day!</q>
</p>

<p>
Rabbi Schimeon commenced, and said, Cant. vii. 10: <q rend='pre'><q>I am
my beloved's, and his desire is toward me.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>As long as I have been bound unto this world in one link
with God, the Most Holy One&mdash;may He be blessed!&mdash;have I
been bound, and therefore now is His desire toward me.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>For He Himself and His whole holy company come, so
that with joy they may hear the concealed words, and the praise
of Him, the Most Holy Ancient One, the Concealed with all
Concealments.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And He separateth Himself ever more and more; He is
separated from all things, neither yet doth He altogether
separate Himself, seeing that unto Himself all things adhere,
and that He Himself adhereth unto all; HVA, <hi rend='italic'>Hoa</hi>, He Himself
is all; He the Most Holy Ancient of all Ancients, the Concealed
with all Concealments.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>He hath been formed, and yet as it were He hath not been
formed. He hath been conformed, so that He may sustain all
things; yet is He not formed, seeing that He is not discovered.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>When He is conformed He produceth nine Lights, which
shine forth from Him, from His conformation.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And from Himself those Lights shine forth, and they emit
flames, and they rush forth and are extended on every side, like
as from an elevated lantern the rays of light stream down on
every side.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And those rays of light,<note place='foot'>Carrying on
the simile of the lantern and its rays.</note> which are extended, when anyone
draweth near unto them, so that they may be examined, are
not found, and there is only the lantern alone.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>So also is He the Most Holy and Ancient One: He is that
highest Light concealed with all concealments, and He is not
found; those rays<note place='foot'>The Sephiroth.</note>
(proceeding from Him) being excepted,
which are extended, which are revealed, and which are hidden.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And they are called the Holy Name, and therefore are all
things One.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Which truly our companions have said in former books,
<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>
that certain paths have been created by the Most Holy Ancient
One, who is revealed through them collectively and severally;
since they are the conformations of the Most Holy Ancient
One, concerning them now there is not time for examination.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I have spoken concerning them in the Holy Assembly, and
I have beheld that which before I did not understand in such a
manner, and I have hidden the matter in my heart.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But now I alone will describe these things before the Holy
King, and all those assuredly just men who have assembled to
hear these words.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter II'/>
<head>Chapter II: Concerning the Skull of the Ancient One, and Concerning
His Brain; and Concerning the Three
Heads, and the Hair, and the Discriminatory Paths</head>

<p>
The skull of the White Head hath not beginning, but its end
is the convexity of its joining together, which is extended, and
shineth.
</p>

<p>
And from it the just shall inherit 400<note place='foot'>Which is the number
of Th, the last letter of the Hebrew alphabet, which
includes the symbology of the cross.</note> desirable worlds in
the world to come.
</p>

<p>
And from this convexity of the joining together of this
White Skull daily distilleth a dew into Microprosopus, into
that place which is called Heaven; and in that very place shall
the dead be raised to life in the time to come.
</p>

<p>
Like as it is written, Gen. xxvii. 27: <q>And Elohim shall
give thee from the dew of heaven.</q>
</p>

<p>
And His head is filled with that dew, and all the place of the
apple-trees distilleth therewith.
</p>

<p>
He, the Most Holy Ancient One, is hidden and concealed, and
in that Skull is the Supernal Wisdom concealed, who is found
and who is not found.
</p>

<p>
For assuredly in Him, the Ancient One, nothing is revealed
save the Head alone, seeing that that Head is itself the Head of
all heads.
</p>

<p>
The beginning of that Supernal Wisdom which also is itself
the Head, is hidden therein, and is called the Supernal Brain,
<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>
the Hidden Brain, the Tranquil and Calm Brain; neither doth
any man know it, save He Himself.
</p>

<p>
Three Heads have been formed forth, one within the other,
and the other above the other.
</p>

<p>
One Head is the Concealed Wisdom, which is covered and is
not disclosed.
</p>

<p>
And this Hidden Wisdom is the Head of all things, and the
Head of the remaining Wisdoms.
</p>

<p>
The Supernal Head is the Most Holy Ancient One, the Concealed
with all Concealments.
</p>

<p>
The Head of all Heads, the Head which is not a Head<note place='foot'>That is to say,
which will hardly admit even of so vague a definition, seeing
it is the Indefinite Absolute in Kether.</note>&mdash;namely,
that which is <emph>in</emph> that Head&mdash;neither knows nor is
known, because it cannot be comprehended either by Wisdom
or Understanding.
</p>

<p>
And therefore is it read, Num. xxiv. 11: <q>Fly thee in thy
place;</q> and Ezek. i. 14. The <foreign rend='italic'>Chaioth</foreign>,
living creatures, are said to run forth and return.
</p>

<p>
And therefore is the Most Holy Ancient One called AIN,
<foreign rend='italic'>Ain</foreign>, the Negatively Existent; seeing that back from Him
dependeth the AIN, the Negative Existence.<note place='foot'>We
must be most careful not to misapprehend the meaning intended to be
conveyed in this passage. Kether, the Ancient One, Macroprosopus, is not in
the more restricted sense of the first Sephira, the AIN, but that that idea
links back from Him must be manifest on consideration. Yet even He, the
Vast Countenance, is hidden and concealed; how much more, then, the
AIN! From Negative to Positive, through Potential Existence, eternally
vibrates the Divine Absolute of the Hidden Unity of processional form masked
in the Eternal Abyss of the Unknowable, the synthetical hieroglyph of an
illimitable pastless futureless Present. To the uttermost bounds of space rushes
the Voice of Ages, unheard save in the concentrated unity of the thought-formulated
Abstract, and eternally that Voice formulates a Word which is
glyphed in the vast ocean of limitless life.</note>
</p>

<p>
But all those hairs and all those locks depend from the Hidden
Brain.
</p>

<p>
And all are calm (otherwise, are disposed) in the Equilibrium;
neither in any manner is the neck seen (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, because of the
locks which overshadow it).
</p>

<p>
Because He the Most Holy Ancient One is in an unvarying
condition of joy, neither changeth He from mercy forever.
</p>

<p>
But in the thirteen measurements<note place='foot'>The thirteen conformations of the
beard of Macroprosopus.</note> of mercies is He found,
because that Wisdom hidden in Him is divided into three<note place='foot'>The Trinity
completed by the Quaternary.</note>
paths in a quaternary, and He Himself the Ancient One comprehendeth
<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>
them, and through them doth He reign over all
things.
</p>

<p>
One (path) which shineth in the midst of the hairs going
forth from the Skull, is that path by whose light the just are
led into the world to come.
</p>

<p>
Like as it is written, Prov. iv. 18, <q>And the path of the just
shineth as the Light.</q>
</p>

<p>
And concerning this it is written, Isa. lviii. 14, <q>Then shalt
thou delight thyself in Tetragrammaton.</q>
</p>

<p>
And from that path<note place='foot'>Kether, the first Sephira, from which
all the other Sephiroth proceed, namely, those which are summed up in the
Tetragrammaton.</note> are all the other paths illuminated which
depend from Microprosopus.
</p>

<p>
He the Eternal Ancient of the Ancient Ones is the highest
Crown among the Supernals, wherewith all Diadems and
Crowns are crowned.
</p>

<p>
And from Him are all the Lights illuminated, and they flash
forth flames, and shine.
</p>

<p>
But He verily is the Supreme Light, which is hidden, which
is not known.
</p>

<p>
And all the other Lights are kindled by Him, and derive
(their) splendor (from him).
</p>

<p>
He the Most Holy Ancient One is found to have three heads,
which are contained in the One Head.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>,
his manifestation is triune.</note>
</p>

<p>
And He Himself is that only highest supreme Head.
</p>

<p>
And since He the Most Holy Ancient One is thus symbolized
in the Triad, hence all the other Lights which shine are included
in Triads.<note place='foot'><p>This refers to the Triads in the
Sephiroth, when the Autz Chaiim is formed. (See Introduction.) It will be
found that in this arrangement of the ten Sephiroth there are ten Triads, viz.:
</p>
<p>
(1) Kether, Chokmah, Binah.
</p>
<p>
(2) Chesed, Geburah, Tiphereth.
</p>
<p>
(3) Netzach, Hod, Yesod.
</p>
<p>
(4) Chokmah, Chesed, Netzach.
</p>
<p>
(5) Tiphereth, Yesod, Malkuth.
</p>
<p>
(6) Binah, Geburah, Hod.
</p>
<p>
(7) Chokmah, Tiphereth, Hod.
</p>
<p>
(8) Binah, Tiphereth, Netzach.
</p>
<p>
(9) Chesed, Tiphereth, Hod.
</p>
<p>
(10) Geburah, Tiphereth, Netzach.
</p>
<p>
Wherein Kether and Malkuth are each repeated once; Chokmah, Binah,
Chesed, and Geburah, thrice; Tiphereth, six times; Netzach and Hod
each four times; and Yesod twice.</p></note>
</p>

<p>
Moreover, the Most Holy Ancient One is also symbolized by
the Duad.
</p>

<p>
And the division of the Ancient One in the Duad is so that the
(one form is) the Highest Crown of all the Supernals, the
Head of all Heads.
</p>

<p>
And (the other is) that superior Head, and It is not known.
</p>

<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>

<p>
So also all the remaining Lights are mystically divided into
Duads.
</p>

<p>
Furthermore, the Most Holy Ancient One is symbolized and
concealed under the conception of the Unity, for He himself is
One, and all things are One.
</p>

<p>
And thus all the other Lights are sanctified, are restricted,
and are bound together in the Unity or Monad, and are One;
and all things are HVA, <hi rend='italic'>Hoa</hi>, Himself.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter III'/>
<head>Chapter III: Concerning the Forehead of the Most Holy Ancient
One</head>

<p>
The Forehead, which is uncovered in the Most Holy Ancient
One, is called Grace.
</p>

<p>
For that Supernal Head concealed in the Higher, which no
man hath known, expandeth a certain external manifestation,
beautiful and gracious, which is comprehended in the Forehead.
</p>

<p>
And since He Himself is the grace of all graciousness; hence
He assumeth the conformation of the Forehead, which is disclosed
in the most intense light (otherwise, hath a formation in
the figure of a leaf).
</p>

<p>
And when It is disclosed, the grace of all graciousness is
found in all worlds.
</p>

<p>
And all the prayers of the Inferiors are accepted; and the
countenance of Microprosopus is illuminated, and all things
are found to exist in mercy.
</p>

<p>
And since (through this) all judgments are hidden and subjected,
hence in the Sabbath, in the time of the afternoon
prayers, in which all judgments are excited, that Forehead is
disclosed.
</p>

<p>
And all the judgments are turned aside, and mercies are
found.
</p>

<p>
And therefore is the Sabbath found without judgment, as
well that which is above as that which is below; also the fire of
Gehenna is restrained in its place, and the transgressors are at
rest.
</p>

<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>

<p>
And therefore is the Spirit <hi rend='smallcaps'>NShMTh</hi>, of joy added on the
Sabbath.
</p>

<p>
And it behoveth man to rejoice with three feasts on the Sabbath;
for all truth, and the whole system of true faith, is found
therein (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, in the Sabbath).
</p>

<p>
And it behoveth man to prepare the table, that he may eat
in the three feasts of true faith, and rejoice in them.<note place='foot'>In
many of the ancient mysteries a <q>feast</q> was part of the ceremony, analogous
to our Eucharist. Verbum sapientibus.</note>
</p>

<p>
Rabbi Schimeon said: <q rend='pre'>I attest concerning myself, before
all these who are here present, that through all my days I have
not omitted these three feasts, and that because of them I have
not been compelled to fast on the Sabbath.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Furthermore, also on other days I have not been compelled
(to fast), much less on the Sabbath, for he who rightly acteth
concerning these (feasts) is the adept of perfect truth.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The first feast is that of the Great Mother; the second that
of the Holy King; and the third that of the Most Holy Ancient
One, the Concealed with all Concealments.<note place='foot'>That is, the greatest triad
of the Sephiroth, the Crown, King, and Queen; which finds a parallel in the Osiris, Isis,
and Horus; the Axieros, Axiochersos, and Axiochersa of Lemnos and Samothrace,
etc.</note></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And in this world, who can thoroughly follow out, through
them, those paths?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>If this <hi rend='smallcaps'>RTzVN</hi>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Ratzon</foreign>, Grace, be revealed, all those judgments
are enlightened, and are diverted from their concentrated
rigor.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The conformation of Him, the Most Holy Ancient One,
is instituted through one form, which is the ideal Syntagma of
all forms.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The same is the Concealed Supernal Wisdom, the synthesis
of all the rest.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And this is called ODN, <foreign rend='italic'>Eden</foreign>,
or the supernal Paradise, concealed with all occultations.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And it is the Brain of the Most Holy Ancient One, and that
Brain is expanded on every side.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Therefore is it extended into Eden, or another
Paradise,<note place='foot'>Described in other places as the
Supernal Eden and the Inferior Eden.</note>
and from this is Eden or Paradise formed forth.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And when this Head, which is concealed in the Head of
the Ancient One, which is not known, extendeth a certain frontal
formation, which is formed for brilliance, then flasheth forth
the Lightning of His Brain.</q>
</p>

<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And it is formed forth and illuminated with many Lights.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And it produceth and designeth (a certain effect) in this
Light (otherwise, in this opening), in this Forehead, whereon
is inscribed a certain Light, which is called <hi rend='smallcaps'>RTzVN</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Ratzon</hi>, Grace.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And that Grace is extended backward into the beard, even
unto that place where it can remain in the beard, and it is called
the Supernal, <hi rend='smallcaps'>ChSD</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Chesed</hi>, Mercy.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And when this Grace is uncovered, all the Lords of Judgment
behold It, and are turned aside.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter IV'/>
<head>Chapter IV: Concerning the Eyes of the Most Holy Ancient One</head>

<p>
The eyes of the Head of the Most Holy Ancient One are two
in one,<note place='foot'>The Duad equated in the Monad. Compare what I have previously
remarked concerning the profile symbolism of Macroprosopus.</note>
equal, which ever watch, and sleep not.
</p>

<p>
Like as it is written, Ps. cxxi. 4, <q>The Keeper of Israel
neither slumbereth nor sleepeth,</q> etc.; namely, of Israel the
holy.
</p>

<p>
And therefore are there no eyebrows nor eyelashes unto His
eyes.
</p>

<p>
This Brain is conformed and illuminated with three supernal
white brilliances.
</p>

<p>
With this white brilliance are the eyes of Microprosopus
bathed.
</p>

<p>
As it is written, Cant. v. 12, <q>Washed with milk,</q> flowing
down from the fullness of that primal white brilliance.
</p>

<p>
And with the remaining white brilliances are the other lights
cleansed and purified.
</p>

<p>
The Brain is called the Fountain of Benevolence, the fountain
wherein all blessings are found.
</p>

<p>
And since this Brain radiateth into the three white brilliances
of the eye (of Microprosopus), hence is that called the <q>good
eye,</q> concerning which it is said, Prov. xxii. 9, <q>It shall be
blessed,</q> or rather that from it dependeth blessing.
</p>

<p>
For through the Brain are manifested the white brilliances
of the eye.
</p>

<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>

<p>
And when this eye looketh upon Microprosopus, all the
worlds are (in a state of) happiness.
</p>

<p>
This is the right eye. The inferior eyes are right and left,
two in duplicate color.
</p>

<p>
In the <q>Book of Concealed Mystery</q> have we taught that
there is a Superior Yod, an Inferior Yod; a Superior He, an
Inferior He; a Superior Vau, an Inferior Vau.
</p>

<p>
Unto the Ancient One pertain all the Superiors, and unto
Microprosopus the Inferiors.
</p>

<p>
They depend not in another manner, but only thus; for from
the Most Holy Ancient One do they depend.
</p>

<p>
For the Name of the Ancient One is concealed in all things,
neither is it found.
</p>

<p>
But those letters which depend from the Ancient One, so
that they may be established, are all inferiors. For were it not
so, they could not be established.
</p>

<p>
And therefore is the Holy Name<note place='foot'>The student will observe throughout
the Qabalah that great stress is laid on the power of names, which arises from
the fact that each qabalistical name is the synthesis of a power. Hence to
<q>pronounce that name</q> is to use that power.</note>
<emph>alike</emph> concealed and manifest.
</p>

<p>
For that which is concealed pertaineth unto the Most Holy
Ancient One, the Concealed in all things.
</p>

<p>
But that, indeed, which is manifested, because it dependeth,
belongeth unto Microprosopus. (Otherwise, that which is
manifested, is so for this reason&mdash;that it is manifested because
it dependeth, etc.)
</p>

<p>
And therefore do all the blessings require both concealment
and manifestation.
</p>

<p>
Those concealed letters which hang behind depend from the
Most Holy Ancient One.
</p>

<p>
Wherefore do they hang behind? For the purpose of establishing
the Inferior Yod. (Otherwise, assuredly from the
Skull, from the Forehead, from the Eyes, do they depend. And
the Yod Maternal<note place='foot'>The word I have translated <q>Maternal</q>
is AMH, Amah, with a double Kametz point. Rosenroth renders it,
<q>Yod Membri.</q></note> dependeth toward the Inferior Yod.)
</p>

</div>

<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter V'/>
<head>Chapter V: Concerning the Nose of the Most Holy Ancient One</head>

<p>
The Nose. From this nose, from the openings of the nostrils,
the Spirit of Life rusheth forth upon Microprosopus.
</p>

<p>
And from that opening of the nose, from those openings of
the nostrils, dependeth the letter He, in order to establish the
other and inferior He.
</p>

<p>
And that Spirit proceedeth from the hidden brain, and She
is called the Spirit of Life, and through that Spirit<note place='foot'>Speaking of
the unity, the <q>Sepher Yetzirah</q> says: <q>One is She, the
Spirit of the Elohim of life (blessed and more than blessed be His name who is
the life of ages), Voice, and Spirit, and Word&mdash;this is She, the Spirit of
holiness.</q></note> will all men understand
<hi rend='smallcaps'>ChKMThA</hi>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Chokmatha</foreign>, Wisdom, in the
time of King Messiah.
</p>

<p>
As it is written, Isa. xi. 2: <q>And the Spirit of Wisdom and
Understanding, <hi rend='smallcaps'>RVCh
ChKMH VBINH</hi>, <foreign rend='italic'>Ruach Chokmah
Va-Binah</foreign>, shall rest upon Him,</q> etc.
</p>

<p>
This nose is life in every part; perfect joy, rest of spirit, and
health.
</p>

<p>
The nose of Microprosopus is as we have (before) conformed
it.
</p>

<p>
Since concerning Him it is said, Ps. xviii. 9, <q>There
ascendeth a smoke in his nose,</q> etc.
</p>

<p>
But concerning this it is written, Isa. xlviii. 9, <q>And for my
name's sake will I defer mine anger (literally, lengthen my
nose) for thee.</q>
</p>

<p>
(But in the book which is called <q>The Treatise of the School
of Rav Yeyeva the Elder,</q> the letter He is located in the mouth,
and he doth not argue in the same manner as in the text, neither
doth he bring about the same combination, although the matter
eventuateth in the same manner.)
</p>

<p>
But yet from the letter the judgment dependeth, and judgment
pertaineth unto the nose (of Microprosopus). Like as
it is written, Ps. xviii. 9, <q>Smoke ascendeth out of His nose.</q>
</p>

<p>
And if thou sayest that behold also it is written, <q>And fire
out of His mouth consumeth,</q> surely the foundation of wrath
dependeth from His nose.
</p>

<p>
All the conformations of the Most Holy Ancient One are
formed forth from the calm and concealed brain.
</p>

<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>

<p>
And all the conformations of Microprosopus are formed
through the Inferior <foreign rend='italic'>Chokmah</foreign>, Wisdom. Like as it is
written, Ps. civ. 24, <q>All these hast thou made in Chokmah.</q> And certainly
it (Wisdom) is the epitome of all things.
</p>

<p>
Now what is the difference between H, <hi rend='italic'>He</hi>, and H,
<hi rend='italic'>He</hi>? By the Inferior <hi rend='italic'>He</hi> is
judgment stirred up; but in this instance,
through the other <hi rend='italic'>He</hi>, mercy unto mercy is denoted.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter VI'/>
<head>Chapter VI: Concerning the Beard of the Most Holy Ancient One</head>

<p>
From the Beard of the Most Holy Ancient One hangeth the
whole ornament of all, and the Influence; for all things are
called from that beard, Influence.
</p>

<p>
This is the Ornament of all Ornaments, and this influence do
all the superiors and inferiors alike behold.
</p>

<p>
From this Influence dependeth the life of all things.
</p>

<p>
From this Influence heavens and earth depend, the rains of
grace, and the nourishment of all things.
</p>

<p>
From this Influence cometh the providence of all things.
From this Influence depend all the superior and inferior hosts.
</p>

<p>
Thirteen fountains of excellent and precious oil depend from
this beard of most glorious Influence, and they all flow down
into Microprosopus.
</p>

<p>
Say not thou, however, that all do so, but nine of them are
found (in Microprosopus) for the purpose of diverting the
judgments.
</p>

<p>
And whensoever this Influence hangeth down in equilibrium
even unto the heart, all the Holinesses of the Holinesses of
Holiness depend from it.
</p>

<p>
In that Influence is extended an expansion of the Supernal
Emanation,<note place='foot'>The word is OVTRA. Rosenroth
translates it by <q>Aporrhea.</q> It may also be translated <q>vapor,</q> or
<q>nebula.</q></note> which is the Head of all Heads, which is not
known nor perfected, and which neither superiors nor inferiors
have known, because from that Influence all things depend.
</p>

<p>
In this beard the Three Heads concerning which we have
spoken are expanded, and all things are associated together in
this Influence, and are found therein.
</p>

<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>

<p>
And therefore every ornament of ornaments dependeth from
that Influence.
</p>

<p>
Those letters which depend from this Ancient One all hang
in that beard, and are associated together in that Influence.
</p>

<p>
And they hang therein for the purpose of establishing the
other letters.
</p>

<p>
For unless those letters could ascend into the Ancient One,
those other letters could not be established.
</p>

<p>
And therefore Moses saith when necessary IHVH, IHVH,
twice; and so that an accent distinguishes the one from the
other.
</p>

<p>
For assuredly from the Influence all things depend.
</p>

<p>
By that Influence are both superiors and inferiors brought
unto reverence, and are prostrate before it.
</p>

<p>
Blessed is he who attaineth hereunto.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter VII'/>
<head>Chapter VII: Concerning the Brain and the Wisdom in General</head>

<p>
Of this Most Holy Ancient One, Concealed with all Concealments,
there is no mention made, neither is He found.
</p>

<p>
For since this Head is the supreme of all the supernals, hence
He is only symbolized as a head alone without body, for the
purpose of establishing all things.
</p>

<p>
And He Himself is concealed, and hidden, and kept recondite
by all things.
</p>

<p>
His conformation is that He is formed forth in that brain, the
most hidden of all things, which is expanded and formed forth,
and hence proceedeth the superior and inferior <hi rend='smallcaps'>ChSD</hi>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Chesed</foreign>, Mercy.
</p>

<p>
And the superior Chesed is formed forth and expanded, and
all things are comprehended in this concealed brain.
</p>

<p>
For when that White Brilliance is formed forth in that Light,
it acteth upon that which acteth upon this brain, and it is enlightened.
</p>

<p>
And the second brain dependeth from that very glorious Influence,
it is expanded into the thirty-two<note place='foot'>The ten numbers
and twenty-two letters.</note> paths, when it is
<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>
illuminated, then it shineth from that very glorious Influence.<note place='foot'>MZL
= 40 x 7 x 30 = 77, which is OZ, Strength or Vigor. This Gematria is
worthy of note as giving the idea of foundational power.</note>
</p>

<p>
Therefore are the Three Supernal Heads illuminated; Two
Heads, and One which comprehendeth them; and they hang in
that Influence, and by It are they comprehended.
</p>

<p>
Hence becometh the ornament of the beard to be manifested,
which is the occult Influence.
</p>

<p>
And those inferiors are conformed, like as the Most Holy
Ancient One.
</p>

<p>
The Three Heads surround Him; thus all things can appear
in the Three Heads; and when they are illuminated all things
depend together from Him in the Three Heads, whereof two are
on the two sides, and one which includeth them.
</p>

<p>
And if thou sayest, <q>Who is the Most Holy Ancient One?</q>
come and see. The Supreme Head is that which is not known,
nor comprehended, nor designated, and that (Head) comprehendeth
all things.
</p>

<p>
And the Two Heads are contained in Itself. (Otherwise
hang, etc.)
</p>

<p>
And then are all these things thus ordained; truly Himself
existeth not in numeration, nor in system, nor in computation,
but in the judgment of the heart.
</p>

<p>
Concerning this it is written, Ps. xxxix. 2, <q>I said I will take
heed unto my ways, that I offend not with my tongue.</q>
</p>

<p>
The place of commencement is found from the Most Holy
Ancient One, and it is illuminated by the Influence. That is the
Light of Wisdom.
</p>

<p>
And it is extended in thirty-two directions, and departeth
from that hidden brain, from that Light which existeth in Itself.
</p>

<p>
And because the Most Holy Ancient One shineth in the beginning
(otherwise, in the wisdom), this itself is this. And the
same is that beginning from which manifestation is made.
</p>

<p>
And is conformed in the Three Heads, which One Head
includeth.
</p>

<p>
And those three are extended into Microprosopus, and from
them all things shine forth.
</p>

<p>
Thenceforth this Wisdom instituteth a formation, and produceth
<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>
a certain river which floweth down and goeth forth to
water the garden.
</p>

<p>
And it entereth into the head of Microprosopus, and formeth
a certain other brain.
</p>

<p>
And thence it is extended and floweth forth into the whole
body, and watereth all those plants (of the garden of Eden).
</p>

<p>
This is that which standeth written, Gen. ii. 9: <q>And a river
went out of Eden to water the garden,</q> etc.
</p>

<p>
But also this Wisdom instituteth another formation, and is
extended and goeth into the head of Microprosopus, and
formeth another brain.
</p>

<p>
That is the Light from which are produced those two rivulets
which are associated together, carved out hollows in the One
Head, which is called the depth of the
fountain.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, the containing power.</note>
</p>

<p>
Concerning which it is written, Prov. iii. 20, <q>In <hi rend='smallcaps'>DOTh</hi>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Daath</foreign>,<note place='foot'>Daath is the conjunction of
Chokmah and Binah. (See <q>Book of Concealed Mystery,</q> chap. i. § 40.)</note>
Knowledge, the depths are broken up.</q>
</p>

<p>
And it entereth into the head of Microprosopus, and
formeth another brain.
</p>

<p>
And thenceforth is it extended and goeth into the interior
parts of His body, and filleth all those conclaves and assemblies
of His body.
</p>

<p>
This is that same which is written, Prov. xxiv. 4, <q>In Daath
shall the secret places be filled.</q>
</p>

<p>
And those shine from the Light of that supernal concealed
brain which shineth in the Influence, MZL, of the Most Holy
Ancient One.
</p>

<p>
And all things depend mutually from Himself, and mutually
are bound together unto Himself, until He is known, because
all things are one, and HVA, <hi rend='italic'>Hoa</hi>, He, the Ancient One, is all
things, neither from Him can anything whatsoever be separated.
</p>

<p>
Into three other Lights, which are called the Fathers, do
these three Lights shine, and these fathers shine into the children,
and all things shine forth from the one place.<note place='foot'>This is
analogous to the teaching of the <q>Sepher Yetzirah,</q> that the Three
Mothers, A, M, Sh, radiate into three paternal forms of the same. A, M, and
Sh symbolize the potencies of Air, Water, and Fire.</note>
</p>

<p>
When He, that Ancient One, who is the Grace of all Grace,
is manifested, all things are found in light and in perfect happiness.
</p>

<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>

<p>
This Eden is derived from the superior Eden, the Concealed
with all Concealments.
</p>

<p>
And therefore is that Eden called the beginning in the Ancient
One; neither yet, however, is there beginning or end.<note place='foot'>For
<q>commencement</q> denotes end, and end denotes <q>commencement</q>;
how, then, in the Absolute can there be either? Nevertheless, in the Absolute
must we seek for the hypothetical starting-point of life.</note>
</p>

<p>
And since in Him beginning and end exist not, hence He is
not called <hi rend='smallcaps'>AThH</hi>, <foreign rend='italic'>Atah</foreign>,
Thou; seeing that He is concealed and
not revealed. But HVA, <hi rend='italic'>Hoa</hi>, He, is He called.
</p>

<p>
But in that aspect wherein the beginning is found, the name
<hi rend='smallcaps'>AThH</hi>, <foreign rend='italic'>Atah</foreign>,
Thou, hath place, and the name AB, <foreign rend='italic'>Ab</foreign>, Father.
For it is written, Isa. lxiii. 16: <q>Since <foreign rend='italic'>Atah</foreign>,
Thou, art <foreign rend='italic'>Ab</foreign>, our Father.</q>
</p>

<p>
In the teaching of the school of Rav Yeyeva the Elder, the
universal rule is that Microprosopus be called <hi rend='smallcaps'>AThH</hi>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Atah</foreign>,
Thou; but that the Most Holy Ancient One, who is concealed,
be called HVA, <hi rend='italic'>Hoa</hi>, He; and also with reason.
</p>

<p>
Now truly in that place wherein beginning is found, is He
thus called, although He is concealed.
</p>

<p>
And therefrom is the beginning, and it is called <hi rend='smallcaps'>AThH</hi>, Atah,
Thou; and He is the Father of the Fathers.
</p>

<p>
And that Father proceedeth from the Most Holy Ancient
One, like as it is written, Job xxviii. 12: <q>And <hi rend='smallcaps'>ChKMH</hi>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Chokmah</foreign>,<note place='foot'>Let the student carefully
note that this is the second Sephira, the I of IHVH, the Father proceeding from
Macroprosopus, Kether, as He proceedeth from Ain Soph.</note>
Wisdom, is found from AIN, <hi rend='italic'>Ain</hi>, the Negatively
Existent One;</q> and therefore is He not known.
</p>

<p>
Come and see! It is written <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> 22, <q>The Elohim have
known the path</q>; His path, properly speaking.
</p>

<p>
But again, further on: <q>VHVA, <foreign rend='italic'>Va-Hoa</foreign>, and He Himself
knoweth His place;</q> His place properly speaking; much more
His path; and much more this Wisdom which is concealed in
the Most Holy Ancient One.
</p>

<p>
This Wisdom is the beginning of all things. Thencefrom
are expanded the thirty-two paths. <hi rend='smallcaps'>ShBILIN</hi>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Shebilin</foreign>, Paths,
I say; and not <hi rend='smallcaps'>ARChIN</hi>, Archin, By-ways.
</p>

<p>
And in them is the Law comprehended, in the twenty-two
letters and in the ten utterances.<note place='foot'>The Sephiroth, or numbers.</note>
</p>

<p>
This Chokmah is the Father of Fathers, and in this Chokmah
is beginning and end discovered; and therefore is there one
Chokmah supernal, and another Chokmah inferior.
</p>

<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>

<p>
When Chokmah is extended, then is He called the Father of
Fathers, for in none else are all things comprehended save in
Him. (Otherwise, when they are expanded all things are called
Chokmoth,<note place='foot'><q>Chokmoth</q> is plural of <q>Chokmah,</q>
Wisdom.</note> and the Father of Fathers; all things are comprehended
in no place, save herein.)
</p>

<p>
As it is written, Ps. civ. 25, <q>All things in Chokmah hast
Thou formed.</q>
</p>

<p>
Rabbi Schimeon lifted up his hands, and rejoiced, and said,
<q>Assuredly it is Eden or Paradise, and all things have their
operation in this hour.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter VIII'/>
<head>Chapter VIII: Concerning the Father and the Mother in Special</head>

<p>
Come and behold. When the Most Holy Ancient One, the
Concealed with all Concealments, desired to be formed forth,
He conformed all things under the form of Male and Female;
and in such place wherein Male and Female are comprehended.
</p>

<p>
For they could not permanently exist save in another aspect
of the Male and the Female (their countenances being joined
together).
</p>

<p>
And this Wisdom embracing all things, when it goeth forth
and shineth forth from the Most Holy Ancient One, shineth
not save under the form of Male and Female.
</p>

<p>
Therefore is this Wisdom extended, and it is found that it
equally becometh Male and Female.
</p>

<p>
CHKMH AB BINH AM, <foreign rend='italic'>Chokmah Ab Binah Am</foreign>:
Chokmah<note place='foot'>Chokmah is the second and Binah
is the third of the Sephiroth. This section is a sufficient condemnation of all
those who wish to make out that woman is inferior to man.</note>
is the Father, and Binah is the Mother, and therein are
Chokmah, Wisdom, and Binah, Understanding, counterbalanced
together in most perfect equality of Male and Female.
</p>

<p>
And therefore are all things established in the equality of
Male and Female; for were it not so, how could they subsist!
</p>

<p>
This beginning is the Father of all things; the Father of all
Fathers; and both are mutually bound together, and the one
<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>
path shineth into the other&mdash;Chokmah, Wisdom, as the
Father; Binah, Understanding, as the Mother.
</p>

<p>
And therefore is it called BINH, as if (it were a transposition
of) BN IH, <hi rend='italic'>Ben Yah</hi>, Son of IH (or <hi rend='italic'>I</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Yod</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>H</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>He</hi>, and
<hi rend='italic'>BN</hi>, the Son).
</p>

<p>
But They both are found to be the perfection of all things
when They are associated together, and when the Son is in
Them the Syntagma of all things findeth place.
</p>

<p>
For in Their conformations are They found to be the perfection
of all things&mdash;Father and Mother, Son and Daughter.
</p>

<p>
These things have not been revealed save unto the Holy
Superiors who have entered therein and departed therefrom,
and have known the paths of the Most Holy God (may He be
blessed!), so that they have not erred in them either on the
right hand or on the left.
</p>

<p>
For thus it is written, Hos. xiv. 9, <q>The paths of Tetragrammaton
are true, and the just shall walk in them,</q> etc.
</p>

<p>
For these things are concealed, and the Holy Highest Ones
shine in them, like as light proceedeth from the shining of a
lantern.
</p>

<p>
These things are not revealed save unto those who have entered
therein and departed therefrom; for as for him who
hath not entered therein and departed therefrom, better were
it for him that he had never been born.
</p>

<p>
For it hath been manifested before the Most Holy Ancient
One, the Concealed with all Concealments, because these
things have shone into mine heart in the perfection of the love
and fear of the Most Holy God, may He be blessed!
</p>

<p>
And these, my sons, who are here present, know these
things; for into these matters have they entered and therefrom
have they departed; but neither yet into all (the secrets
of them).<note place='foot'>This clause refers to the <q>Unwritten Qabalah.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
But now are these things illustrated in (their) perfection,
even as it was necessary. Blessed be my portion with them
in this world!
</p>

<p>
Rabbi Schimeon said: All which I have said concerning the
Most Holy Ancient One, and all which I have said concerning
<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>
Microprosopus, all are one, all are HVA, <hi rend='italic'>Hoa</hi>, Himself, all
are Unity, neither herein hath separation place.
</p>

<p>
Blessed be HVA, <hi rend='italic'>Hoa</hi>, He, and blessed be His Name unto
the Ages of the Ages.
</p>

<p>
Come, behold! This beginning which is called Father,<note place='foot'>Chokmah, the
second Sephira, which, however, is as it were the repetition of
Kether.</note> is comprehended in I, <hi rend='italic'>Yod</hi>,<note place='foot'>That
is, the letter I, Yod, in HIVH, which is said in the <q>Book of Concealed
Mystery</q> to symbolize Macroprosopus only in its highest point.</note> which dependeth
from the Holy Influence.
</p>

<p>
And therefore is I, <hi rend='italic'>Yod</hi>, the Most Concealed of all the other
letters.<note place='foot'>See <q>Book of Concealed Mystery,</q>
chap. ii. § 37; chap. iv. § 11.</note>
</p>

<p>
For I, <hi rend='italic'>Yod</hi>, is the beginning and the end of all things.
</p>

<p>
And that river which floweth on and goeth forth is called
the World, which is ever to come and ceaseth never.
</p>

<p>
And this is the delight of the just, that they may be made
worthy of that world which is to come, which ever watereth
the garden of Eden, nor faileth.
</p>

<p>
Concerning this it is written, Isa. lviii. 11, <q>And like a fountain
of water, whose waters fail not.</q>
</p>

<p>
And that world to come is created through I, <hi rend='italic'>Yod</hi>.
</p>

<p>
As it is written, Gen. ii. 9, <q>And a river went forth out of
Eden to water the garden.</q>
</p>

<p>
For I, <hi rend='italic'>Yod</hi>, includeth two letters.
</p>

<p>
In the teaching of the school of Rav Yeyeva the Elder thus
is the tradition. Wherefore are VD, <hi rend='italic'>Vau
Daleth</hi>,<note place='foot'>See <q>Book of Concealed Mystery,</q>
chap. ii. § 37.</note> comprehended
in IVD, <hi rend='italic'>Yod</hi>? Assuredly the planting of the garden
is properly called V, <hi rend='italic'>Vau</hi>; and there is another garden which
is D, <hi rend='italic'>Daleth</hi>, and by that Vau is Daleth watered, which is the
symbol of the quaternary.<note place='foot'>The amount of occult symbolism in
this section is enormous, and the key of it is the name of the letter I, which
is IVD, Yod. This is a trinity of letters, and their numerical value is I =
10, V = 6, D = 4, total 20, equivalent to double I; but for reasons given in the
<q>Book of Concealed Mystery</q> the second I is reproduced by a Hexad and a
Tetrad&mdash;namely, V and D. I = 10, the decimal scale of Sephirotic notation, the
key of processional creation; V = 6 = Tiphereth, and Microprosopus the Son
united to D = 4, the Cross. Here is the mystery of the crucifixion of the Son
on the tree of life; and again the Qabalah agrees with Christian symbolism.</note>
</p>

<p>
And an Arcanum is extended from this passage, where it
is written, <q>And a river went forth out of Eden.</q>
</p>

<p>
What is Eden? It is the supernal <hi rend='smallcaps'>ChKMH</hi>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Chokmah</foreign>, Wisdom, and that is I,
<hi rend='italic'>Yod</hi> (in <hi rend='italic'>I</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>V</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>D</hi>).
</p>

<p>
<q>To water the garden.</q> That is V, <hi rend='italic'>Vau</hi>.
</p>

<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>

<p>
<q>And thence it is divided, and goeth forth into four heads.</q>
That is D, <hi rend='italic'>Daleth</hi>.
</p>

<p>
And all things are included in IVD, <hi rend='italic'>Yod</hi>, and therefore is
the Father called All, the Father of Fathers.
</p>

<p>
The beginning of all is called the Home of All. Whence
IVD, <hi rend='italic'>Yod</hi>, is the beginning and the end of all; like as it is
written, Ps. civ. 24, <q>All things in Chokmah hast Thou
made.</q>
</p>

<p>
In His place He is not manifested, neither is He known;
when He is associated with the Mother, BAMA, <hi rend='italic'>Be-Ama</hi>,
then is He made known (otherwise, symbolized) in the
Mother, BAIMA, <hi rend='italic'>Be-Aima</hi>.<note place='foot'><q>Be Ama,</q> <q>with
the Mother;</q> here Ama, AMA, Mother = 42. Be Aima, in the Mother; here Aima,
AIMA = 52 = BN, Ben, Son. This Gematria is most important, because,
be it noted, Aima, AIMA, is the letter I, Yod, which we have just been told
represents Chokmah, joined to AMA, Mother, which is Binah, BINH, which
again is BN IH by Metathesis, Ben Yod He&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, son of IH,
eternally conjoined in Briah.</note>
</p>

<p>
And therefore is Aima known to be the consummation of
all things, and She is signified to be the beginning and the
end.
</p>

<p>
For all things are called Chokmah, and therein are all things
concealed; and the Syntagma of all things is the Holy Name.
</p>

<p>
Thus far have we mystically described that which we have
not said on all the other days. But now are the aspects shown
forth.
</p>

<p>
(As to the Sacred Name <hi rend='italic'>IHVH</hi>) I, <hi rend='italic'>Yod</hi>, is
included in this Chokmah, Wisdom; H, <hi rend='italic'>He</hi>, is Aima, and is called
Binah, Understanding; VH, <hi rend='italic'>Vau He</hi>, are those two Children who are
produced from Aima, the Mother.
</p>

<p>
Also we have learned that the name BINH, Binah, comprehendeth
all things. For in Her is I, <hi rend='italic'>Yod</hi>, which is associated
with Aima, or the letter H, <hi rend='italic'>He</hi>, and together they
produce BN, <hi rend='italic'>Ben</hi>, the Son, and this is the word Binah. Father
and Mother, who are I, <hi rend='italic'>Yod</hi>, and H, <hi rend='italic'>He</hi>,
with whom are interwoven the letters B, <hi rend='italic'>Beth</hi>, and N,
<hi rend='italic'>Nun</hi>, which are BN, <hi rend='italic'>Ben</hi>;
and thus far regarding Binah.
</p>

<p>
Also is She called <hi rend='smallcaps'>ThBVNH</hi>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Thebunah</foreign>, the Special Intelligence.
Wherefore is She sometimes called Thebunah, and
not Binah?
</p>

<p>
Assuredly Thebunah is She called at that time in which Her
two Children appear, the Son and the Daughter, BN <hi rend='smallcaps'>VBTh</hi>,
<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/>
<hi rend='italic'>Ben Va-Bath,</hi> who are VH, <hi rend='italic'>Vau He</hi>;
and at that time is She called <hi rend='smallcaps'>ThBVNH</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Thebunah</hi>.
</p>

<p>
For all things are comprehended in those letters, VH, <hi rend='italic'>Vau
He</hi>, which are <hi rend='smallcaps'>BN VBTh</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Ben Va-Bath</hi>, Son and Daughter;
and all things are one system, and these are the letters
<hi rend='smallcaps'>ThBVNH</hi>.
</p>

<p>
In the Book of Rav Hamenuna the Elder it is said that
Solomon revealeth the primal conformation (that is, the
Mother) when he saith, Cant. i. 15, <q>Behold, thou art fair, my
love</q>; wherefore he followeth it out himself.
</p>

<p>
And he calleth the second conformation the Bride, which
is called the Inferior Woman.
</p>

<p>
And there are some who apply both these names (those,
namely, of Love and Bride) to this Inferior Woman, but these
are not so.
</p>

<p>
For the first H, <hi rend='italic'>He</hi> (of <hi rend='italic'>IHVH</hi>), is not
called the Bride; but the last H, <hi rend='italic'>He</hi>, is called the Bride at
certain times on account of many symbolic reasons.
</p>

<p>
Together They (<hi rend='italic'>Chokmah</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Binah</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>IH</hi>) go forth, together
They are at rest; the one ceaseth not from the other, and the
one is never taken away from the other.
</p>

<p>
And therefore is it written, Gen. ii. 10, <q>And a river went
forth out of Eden</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, properly speaking,
it continually goeth forth and never faileth.
</p>

<p>
As it is written, Isa. lviii. 11, <q>And like a fountain of waters,
whose waters fail not.</q>
</p>

<p>
And therefore is She called <q>My love,</q> since from the grace
of kindred association They rest in perfect unity.
</p>

<p>
But the other is called the Bride, for when the Male cometh
that He may consort with Her, then is She the Bride, for She,
properly speaking, cometh forth as the Bride.
</p>

<p>
And therefore doth Solomon expound those two forms of
the Woman; and concerning the first form indeed he worketh
hiddenly, seeing it is hidden.
</p>

<p>
But the second form is more fully explained, seeing that it
is not so hidden as the other.
</p>

<p>
But at the end all his praise pertaineth unto Her who is
supernal, as it is written, Cant. vi. 9, <q>She is the only one of
Her Mother, She is the choice one of Her that bare Her.</q>
</p>

<p>
And since this Mother, Aima, is crowned with the crown
<pb n='323'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>
of the Bride, and the grace of the letter I, <hi rend='italic'>Yod</hi>, ceaseth not
from Her forever, hence unto Her arbitration is committed all
the liberty of those inferior, and all the liberty of all things,
and all the liberty of sinners, so that all things may be purified.
</p>

<p>
As it is written, Lev. xvi. 30, <q>Since in that day he shall
atone for you.</q>
</p>

<p>
Also is it written, Lev. xxv. 10, <q>And ye shall hallow the
fiftieth year.</q><note place='foot'>The number answering to the <q>fifty
gates of Binah.</q> See <q>Book of Concealed Mystery,</q> chap. i.
§ 46.</note> This year is IVBL, <hi rend='italic'>Yobel</hi>, Jubilee.
</p>

<p>
What is Yobel? As it is written, Jer. xvii. 8, <q>VOL IVBL,
<hi rend='italic'>Va-El Yobel</hi>, And spreadeth out her roots by the river</q>;
therefore that river whichever goeth forth and floweth, and
goeth forth and faileth not.
</p>

<p>
It is written, Prov. ii. 3, <q>If thou wilt call Binah the Mother,
and wilt give thy voice unto Thebunah.</q>
</p>

<p>
Seeing it is here said, <q>If thou wilt call Binah the Mother,</q>
wherefore is Thebunah added?
</p>

<p>
Assuredly, according as I have said, all things are supernal
truth: Binah is higher than Thebunah. For in the word
BINH, <hi rend='italic'>Binah</hi>, are shown Father, Mother, and Son; since by
the letters IH, Father and Mother are denoted, and the letters
BN, denoting the Son, are amalgamated with them.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>ThBVNH</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Thebunah</hi>, is the whole
completion of the children, since it containeth the letters BN,
<hi rend='italic'>Ben</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>BTh</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Bath</hi>,
and VH, <hi rend='italic'>Vau He</hi>, by which are denoted the Son and Daughter.
</p>

<p>
Yet AB VAM, <hi rend='italic'>Ab Ve-Am</hi>, the Father and the Mother, are
not found, save BAIMA, <hi rend='italic'>Be-Aima</hi>, in the Mother, for the
venerable Aima broodeth over Them, neither is She uncovered.
</p>

<p>
Whence it cometh that that which embraceth the two Children
is called <hi rend='smallcaps'>ThBVNH</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Thebunah</hi>, and that
which embraceth the Father, the Mother, and the Son is called BINH,
<hi rend='italic'>Binah</hi>.
</p>

<p>
And when all things are comprehended, they are comprehended
therein, and are called by that name of Father, Mother,
and Son.
</p>

<p>
And these are <hi rend='smallcaps'>ChKMH</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Wisdom</hi>, Father;
BINH, <hi rend='italic'>Understanding</hi>,
Mother; and <hi rend='smallcaps'>DOTh</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Däath</hi>, Knowledge.
</p>

<p>
Since that Son<note place='foot'>Compare this with the Egyptian
Horus, the son of Isis and Osiris. Also notice the interchange of symbols between
Amen, Kneph, and Khom. The name of the great Egyptian God Amen
is noticeable when we compare it with the qabalistic name AMN.</note>
assumeth the symbols of His Father and
<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>
of His Mother, and is called <hi rend='smallcaps'>DOTh</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Däath</hi>, Knowledge, since
He is the testimony of Them both.
</p>

<p>
And that Son is called the first-born, as it is written, Exod.
iv. 22, <q>Israel is my first-born son.</q>
</p>

<p>
And since He is called first-born, therefore it implieth dual
offspring.
</p>

<p>
And when He increaseth, in His Crown appear three divisions.<note place='foot'>Compare
with this the alchemical symbolism of Duenech, the King of
Earth, after being overwhelmed by the waters, rising again, glorified and
crowned with the triple crown of silver, iron, and gold&mdash;Chesed, Geburah, and
Tiphereth, in the alchemic Sephiroth of the metals.</note>
</p>

<p>
But whether it be taken in this way or in that, there are as
well two as three divisions herein, for all things are one; and
so is it in this (light) or in that.<note place='foot'>The meaning is, that Father and
Mother are contained in the Son; for these are the second, third, and sixth
Sephiroth&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, 2, 3, and 6; and both 2
and 3 are contained in 6, for 2 x 3 = 6.</note>
</p>

<p>
Nevertheless, He (the Son) receiveth the inheritance of His
Father and of His Mother.
</p>

<p>
What is that inheritance? These two crowns, which are
hidden within Them, which They pass on in succession to this
Son.<note place='foot'>The reflexive essence of Kether, the
Crown, which operates in Chokmah and Binah.</note>
</p>

<p>
From the side of the Father (<hi rend='italic'>Chokmah</hi>) there is one Crown
concealed therein, which is called Chesed.
</p>

<p>
And from the side of the Mother (<hi rend='italic'>Binah</hi>) there is one Crown,
which is called Geburah.
</p>

<p>
And all those crown His head (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the Head of Microprosopus),
and He taketh them.
</p>

<p>
And when that Father and Mother shine above Him, all
(these crowns) are called the phylacteries of the Head, and
that Son taketh all things, and becometh the heir of all.
</p>

<p>
And He passeth on His inheritance unto the Daughter, and
the Daughter is nourished by Him. But, properly speaking,
henceforth (from the parents) doth the Son become the heir,
and not the Daughter.
</p>

<p>
The Son becometh the heir of His Father and of His
Mother, and not the Daughter, but by Him is the Daughter
cherished.
</p>

<p>
As it is written, Dan. iv. 12, <q>And in that tree food for all.</q>
</p>

<p>
And if thou sayest all, assuredly He as well as She are
<pb n='325'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>
called <hi rend='smallcaps'>TzDIQ</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Tzediq</hi>, Just, and
<hi rend='smallcaps'>TzDQ</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Tzedeq</hi>, Justice, which
are in one and are one.
</p>

<p>
All things are thus. Father and Mother are mutually contained
in and associated with Themselves.
</p>

<p>
And the Father is the more concealed (of the two), and the
whole adhereth unto the Most Holy Ancient One.
</p>

<p>
And dependeth from the Holy Influence, which is the Ornament
of all Ornaments.
</p>

<p>
And they, the Father and the Mother, constitute the abode,
as I have said.
</p>

<p>
As it is written, Prov. xxiv. 3, 4, <q>Through Chokmah is
the abode constructed, and by Thebunah is it established, and
in Däath shall the chambers be filled with all precious and
pleasant riches.</q>
</p>

<p>
Also it is written, Prov. xxii. 18, <q>For it is a pleasant thing
if thou keep (<hi rend='italic'>Däath</hi>) within thee.</q>
</p>

<p>
This is the system of all things, even as I have said, and (all
things) depend from the Glorious Holy Influence.
</p>

<p>
Rabbi Schimeon said: In the (former) Assembly I revealed
not all things, and all those things have been concealed even
until now.
</p>

<p>
And I have wished to conceal them, even unto the world to
come, because there also a certain question will be propounded
unto me.
</p>

<p>
As it is written, Isa. xxxiii. 6, <q>And Chokmah and Däath
shall be the stability of thy times, and strength of salvation;
the fear of Tetragrammaton is His treasure,</q> etc., and they
shall seek out Wisdom, Chokmah.
</p>

<p>
Now truly thus is the will of the Most Holy and Blessed
God, and without shame will I enter in before His palace.
</p>

<p>
It is written, 1 Sam. ii. 3, <q>Since AL <hi rend='smallcaps'>DOVTh</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>El Daoth</hi>,<note place='foot'>Plural of <q>Däath.</q></note>
is Tetragrammaton.</q> Daoth, or of Knowledges (plural),
properly speaking, for He acquireth Daoth by inheritance.
</p>

<p>
Through Daoth are all His palaces filled, as it is written,
Prov. xxix, <q>And in Däath shall the chambers be filled.</q>
</p>

<p>
And therefore Däath is not furthermore revealed, for It
occultly pervadeth Him inwardly.
</p>

<p>
And is comprehended in that brain and in the whole body,
since <q>El Daoth is Tetragrammaton.</q>
</p>

<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>

<p>
In the <q>Book of the Treatise</q> it is said concerning these
words, <q>Since El Daoth is Tetragrammaton,</q> read not
<hi rend='smallcaps'>DOVTh</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Daoth</hi>, of knowledges, but
<hi rend='smallcaps'>ODVTh</hi>,<note place='foot'>By Metathesis.</note>
<hi rend='italic'>Edoth</hi>, of <emph>testimony</emph>.
</p>

<p>
For HVA, <hi rend='italic'>Hoa</hi>, He Himself, is the testimony of all things,
the testimony of the two portions.
</p>

<p>
And it is said, Ps. lxxviii. 5, <q>And He established a testimony,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>ODVTh</hi>, in Jacob.</q>
</p>

<p>
Moreover, also, although we have placed that matter in
the <q>Book of Concealed Mystery,</q> still also there what is
mentioned of it is correct, and so all things are beautiful and
all things are true.
</p>

<p>
When the matter is hidden, that Father and Mother contain
all things, and all things are concealed in them.
</p>

<p>
And they themselves are hidden beneath the Holy Influence
of the Most Ancient of all Antiquity; in Him are they
concealed, in Him are all things included.
</p>

<p>
HVA, <hi rend='italic'>Hoa</hi>, He Himself, is all things; blessed be Hoa, and
blessed be His Name in eternity, and unto the ages of the
ages.
</p>

<p>
All the words of the conclave of the Assembly are beautiful,
and all are holy words&mdash;words which decline not either
unto the right hand or unto the left.
</p>

<p>
All are words of hidden meaning for those who have entered
in and departed thence, and so are they all.
</p>

<p>
And those words have hereunto been concealed; therefore
have I feared to reveal the same, but now they are revealed.
</p>

<p>
And I reveal them in the presence of the Most Holy Ancient
King, for not for mine own glory, nor for the glory of
my Father's house, do I this; but I do this that I may not enter
in ashamed before His palaces.
</p>

<p>
Henceforth I only see that He, God the Most Holy&mdash;may
He be blessed!&mdash;and all these truly just men who are here
found, can all consent (hereunto) with me.
</p>

<p>
For I see that all can rejoice in these my nuptials, and that
they all can be admitted unto my nuptials in that world.
Blessed be my portion!
</p>

<p>
Rabbi Abba saith that when (Rabbi Schimeon) had finished
<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>
this discourse, the Holy Light (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, Rabbi Schimeon) lifted
up his hands and wept, and shortly after smiled.
</p>

<p>
For he wished to reveal another matter, and said: I have
been anxious concerning this matter all my days, and now
they give me not leave.
</p>

<p>
But having recovered himself he sat down, and murmured
with his lips and bowed himself thrice; neither could any other
man behold the place where he was, much less him.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter IX'/>
<head>Chapter IX: Concerning Microprosopus and His Bride in General</head>

<p>
He said: Mouth, mouth, which hath followed out all these
things, they shall not dry up thy fountain.
</p>

<p>
Thy fountain goeth forth and faileth not: surely concerning
thee may this be applied, <q>And a river went forth out of
Eden</q>; also that which is written, <q>Like a fountain of waters
whose waters fail not.</q>
</p>

<p>
Now I testify concerning myself, that all the days which I
have lived I have desired to behold this day, yet was it not the
will (of God).
</p>

<p>
For with this crown is this day crowned, and now as yet I
intend to reveal certain things before God the Most Holy&mdash;may
He be blessed!&mdash;and all these things crown mine head.
</p>

<p>
And this day<note place='foot'>Meaning the period of revealing
these matters, not exactly a day of twenty-four hours: day in the scriptural
and qabalistical sense.</note> suffereth not increase, neither can it pass on
into the place of another day, for this whole day hath been
yielded unto my power.
</p>

<p>
And now I begin to reveal these things, that I may not enter
ashamed into the world to come. Therefore I begin and say:
</p>

<p>
<q>It is written, Ps. lxxxix. 14: <q><hi rend='smallcaps'>TzDQ VMShPT</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Tzedeq Va-Meshephat</hi>, Justice and Judgment are the abode of Thy
throne; <hi rend='smallcaps'>ChSD VAMTh</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Chesed Va-Emeth</hi>,
Mercy and Truth shall go before Thy countenance.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
What wise man will examine this, so that he may behold
His paths, (those, namely) of the Most Holy Supernal One,
the judgments of truth, the judgments which are crowned with
His supernal crowns.
</p>

<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>

<p>
For I say that all the lights which shine from the Supreme
Light, the Most Concealed of All, are all paths (leading)
toward that Light.
</p>

<p>
And in that Light which existeth in those single paths,
whatsoever is revealed is revealed.
</p>

<p>
And all those lights adhere mutually together, this light in
that light, and that light in this light.
</p>

<p>
And they shine mutually into each other, neither are they
divided separately from each other.
</p>

<p>
That Light, I say, of those lights, severally and conjointly,
which are called the conformations of the King, or of the
Crown of the King, that which shineth and adhereth to that
Light, which is the innermost of all things, nor ever shineth
without them.
</p>

<p>
And therefore do all things ascend in one path, and all things
are crowned by one and the same thing, and one thing is not
separated from another, since HVA, <hi rend='italic'>Hoa</hi>, Himself, and His
Name, are one.
</p>

<p>
That Light which is manifested is called the Vestment; for
He Himself, the King, is the Light of all the innermost.
</p>

<p>
In that Light is Hoa, Who is not separated nor manifested.
</p>

<p>
And all those lights and all those luminaries shine forth
from the Most Holy Ancient One, the Concealed with all Concealments,
who is the Highest Light.
</p>

<p>
And whensoever the matter is accurately examined, all
those lights which are expanded are no longer found, save
only that Highest Light.
</p>

<p>
Who is hidden and not manifested, through those vestments
of ornament which are the vestments of truth, <hi rend='smallcaps'>QShVT</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Qeshot</hi>, the forms of truth, the lights of truth.
</p>

<p>
Two light-bearers are found, which are the conformation of
the throne of the King; and they are called <hi rend='smallcaps'>TzDQ</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Tzedeq</hi>, Justice, and <hi rend='smallcaps'>MShPT</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Meshephat</hi>, Judgment.
</p>

<p>
And they are the beginning and the consummation. And
through them are all the Judgments crowned, as well superior
as inferior.
</p>

<p>
And they all are concealed in Meshephat. And from that
Meshephat is Tzedeq nourished.
</p>

<p>
And sometimes they call the same, MLKI <hi rend='smallcaps'>TzDQ</hi> MLK
<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>ShLM</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Meleki Tzedeq Melek Shalem</hi>,
Melchizedek, King of Salem.
</p>

<p>
When the judgments are crowned by Meshephat, all things
are mercy; and all things are in perfect peace, because the one
temperateth the other.
</p>

<p>
Tzedeq and the Rigors are reduced into order, and all these
descend into the world in peace and in mercy.
</p>

<p>
And then is the hour sanctified, so that the Male and the
Female are united, and the worlds all and several exist in
love and in joy.
</p>

<p>
But whensoever sins are multiplied in the world, and the
sanctuary is polluted, and the Male and the Female are separated.<note place='foot'>In
other words, where there is unbalanced force, there is the origin of evil.</note>
</p>

<p>
And when that strong Serpent beginneth to arise, Woe,
then, unto thee, O World! who in that time art nourished by
this Tzedeq. For then arise many slayers of men and executioners
(of judgment) in thee, O World. Many just men are
withdrawn from thee.
</p>

<p>
But wherefore is it thus? Because the Male is separated
from the Female, and Judgment, Meshephat, is not united
unto Justice, Tzedeq.
</p>

<p>
And concerning this time it is written, Prov. xiii. 23, <q>There
is that is destroyed, because therein is not Meshephat.</q> Since
Meshephat is departed from this Tzedeq which is not therefore
restrained; and Tzedeq hath operation after another manner.
</p>

<p>
And concerning this (matter) thus speaketh Solomon the
king, Eccles. vii. 16: <q>All these things have I seen in the days
of my HBL, <hi rend='italic'>Hebel</hi>; there is a just man who perisheth in his
Tzedeq,</q> etc.
</p>

<p>
Where by the word HBL, <hi rend='italic'>Hebel</hi> (which is usually translated
<q>vanity</q>), is understood the breath from those supernal
breathers forth which are called the nostrils of the King.
</p>

<p>
But when he saith HBLI, <hi rend='italic'>Hebeli</hi>, of my breath, Tzedeq,
Justice, is to be understood, which is <hi rend='smallcaps'>MLKVThA QDIShA</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Malkutha Qadisha</hi>, the holy Malkuth (<hi rend='italic'>Sanctum
Regnum</hi>, the Holy Kingdom).
</p>

<p>
For when She is stirred up in Her judgments and severities,
<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>
then hath this saying place, <q>There is a just man who perished
in his Tzedeq.</q>
</p>

<p>
For what reason? Because Judgment, Meshephat, is far
from Justice, Tzedeq. And therefore is it said, Prov. xiii. 23,
<q>And there is that is destroyed because therein is not Meshephat.</q>
</p>

<p>
Come and see! When some sublimely just man is found in
the world, who is dear unto God the Most Holy One&mdash;may He
be blessed!&mdash;then even if Tzedeq, Justice, alone be stirred up,
still on account of him the world can bear it.
</p>

<p>
And God the Most Holy&mdash;may He be blessed!&mdash;increaseth
His glory so that He may not be destroyed by the severity
(of the judgments).
</p>

<p>
But if that just man remaineth not in his place, then from
the midst is he taken away for example by that Meshephat,
Judgment, so that before it he cannot maintain his place, how
much less before Tzedeq, Justice.
</p>

<p>
David the king said at first, Ps. xxvi. 2, <q>Try me, O Tetragrammaton,
and prove me!</q> For I shall not be destroyed
by all the severities, not even by Tzedeq, Justice Herself, seeing
that I am joined thereunto.
</p>

<p>
For what is written, Ps. xvii. 15, <q>In Tzedeq, Justice, I will
behold Thy countenance.</q> Therefore, properly speaking, I
cannot be destroyed through Tzedeq, seeing that I can maintain
myself in its severities.<note place='foot'>Because in those severities, and behind
them, he can see the Countenance of God.</note>
</p>

<p>
But after that he had sinned, he was even ready to be consumed
by that Meshephat, Judgment. Whence it is written,
Ps. cxliii. 2, <q>And enter not into Meshephat, Judgment, with
Thy servant!</q>
</p>

<p>
Come and see! When that Tzedeq, Justice, is mitigated by
that Meshephat, Judgment, then it is called <hi rend='smallcaps'>TzDQH</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Tzedeqah,</hi> Liberality.
</p>

<p>
And the world is tempered by Chesed, Mercy, and is filled
therewith.
</p>

<p>
As it is written, Ps. xxxii. 5: <q>Delighting in <hi rend='smallcaps'>TzDQH</hi>,
Liberality, and <hi rend='smallcaps'>MShPT</hi>, Judgment; the earth is full of the
<hi rend='smallcaps'>ChSD</hi>, Mercy, of Tetragrammaton.</q>
</p>

<p>
I testify concerning myself, that during my whole life I have
<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>
been solicitous in the world, that I should not fall under the
severities of Justice, nor that the world should be burned up
with the flames thereof.
</p>

<p>
As it is written, Prov. xxx. 20, <q>She eateth and wipeth her
mouth.</q>
</p>

<p>
Thenceforward and afterward all and singular are near unto
the Abyss.
</p>

<p>
And verily in this generation certain just men are given
(upon earth); but they are few who arise that they may defend
the flock from the four angels (otherwise, but judgments arise
against the world, and desire to rush upon us).
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter X'/>
<head>Chapter X: Concerning Microprosopus in Especial, with Certain
Digressions; and Concerning the Edomite Kings</head>

<p>
Hereunto have I propounded how one thing agreeth with
another; and I have expounded those things which have been
concealed in the most Holy Ancient One, the Concealed with
all Concealments; and how these are connected with those.
</p>

<p>
But now for a time I will discourse concerning the requisite
parts of Microprosopus; especially concerning those which
were not manifested in the Conclave of the Assembly, and
which have been concealed in mine heart, and have not been
given forth in order therefrom.
</p>

<p>
Hereunto have I mystically and in a subtle manner propounded
all those matters. Blessed is his portion who entereth
therein and departeth therefrom, and (blessed the portion)
of those who shall be the heirs of that inheritance.
</p>

<p>
As it is written, Ps. cxliv. 15, <q>Blessed are the people with
whom it is so,</q> etc.
</p>

<p>
Now these be the matters which we have propounded. The
Father<note place='foot'>Chokmah.</note> and the Mother<note place='foot'>Binah.</note>
adhere unto the Ancient One, and
also unto His conformation; since they depend from the Hidden
Brain, Concealed with all Concealments, and are connected
therewith.
</p>

<p>
And although the Most Holy Ancient One hath been conformed
<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>
(as it were) alone (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, apparently apart from all things
at first sight); yet when all things are accurately inspected, all
things are HVA, <hi rend='italic'>Hoa</hi>, Himself, the Ancient One, alone.
</p>

<p>
Hoa is and Hoa shall be; and all those forms cohere with
Himself, are concealed in Himself, and are not separated from
Himself.
</p>

<p>
The Hidden Brain is not manifested, and (Microprosopus)
doth not depend immediately from it.
</p>

<p>
The Father and the Mother proceed from this Brain, and depend
from It, and are connected with It.
</p>

<p>
(Through Them) Microprosopus dependeth from the Most
Holy Ancient One, and is connected (with Him). And these
things have we already revealed in the Conclave of the Assembly.
</p>

<p>
Blessed is his portion who entereth therein and departeth
therefrom, and hath known the paths; so that he declineth not
unto the right hand, or unto the left.
</p>

<p>
But if any man entereth not therein and departeth therefrom,
better were it for that (man) that he had never been born.
For thus it is written, Hos. xiv. 10, <q>True are Thy ways, O
Tetragrammaton!</q>
</p>

<p>
Rabbi Schimeon spake and said: Through the whole day
have I meditated on that saying where it is said, Ps. xxxiv. 2,
<q>My Nephesch<note place='foot'>See Introduction concerning the parts of the soul,
Chiah, Neschamah, Ruach, and Nephesch.</note> shall rejoice in Tetragrammaton, the
humble shall hear thereof and rejoice</q>; and now that whole text
is confirmed (in my mind).
</p>

<p>
<q>My Nephesch shall rejoice in Tetragrammaton.</q> This is
true, for my Neschamah is connected therewith, radiateth
therein, adhereth thereto, and is occupied thereabout, and in
this same occupation is exalted in its place.
</p>

<p>
<q>The humble shall hear thereof and rejoice.</q> All those
just and blessed men who have come into communion with
God, the Most Holy&mdash;blessed be He!&mdash;all hear and rejoice.
</p>

<p>
Ah! now is the Holy One confessed; and therefore <q>magnify
Tetragrammaton with me, and let us exalt His Name
together!</q>
</p>

<p>
Thus is it written, Gen. xxxvi. 31, <q>And those are the kings
who reigned in the land of Edom.</q> And also it is written
<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>
thus, Ps. xlviii. 4, <q>Since, lo! the kings assembled, they
passed away together.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>In the land of Edom.</q> That is, in the place wherewith the
judgments are connected.
</p>

<p>
<q>They passed away together.</q> As it is written, <q>And he
died, and there reigned in his stead.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>They themselves beheld, so were they astonished; they
feared, and hasted away.</q> Because they remained not in their
place, since the conformations of the King had not as yet been
formed, and the Holy City and its walls were not as yet prepared.
</p>

<p>
This is that which followeth in the text, <q>As we have heard,
so have we seen, in the city,</q> etc. For all did not endure.
</p>

<p>
But She (the Bride) now subsisteth beside the Male, with
Whom She abideth.
</p>

<p>
This is that which is written, Gen. xxxvi. 39, <q>And Hadar
reigned in his stead, and the name of his city was Pau, and the
name of his wife was Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the
daughter of Mizaheb.</q>
</p>

<p>
Assuredly this have we before explained in the Assembly.<note place='foot'>See
<q>Greater Holy Assembly,</q> ch. xlii. §§ 984-996; ch. xxvi.
§§ 513-532.</note>
</p>

<p>
Now, also, in the book of the teaching of Rav Hamenuna
the Elder it is said, <q>And Hadar reigned in his stead.</q> The
word HDR, <hi rend='italic'>Hadar</hi>, is properly to be expounded according
unto that which is said, Lev. xxiii. 40, <q>The fruit of trees
which are HDR, <hi rend='italic'>Hadar</hi>, goodly.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And in the name of his wife Mehetabel,</q> as it is written (in
the text just cited), <q>branches of palm-trees.</q>
</p>

<p>
Also it is written, Ps. xcii. 3, <q>The just man shall flourish
as the palm-tree.</q> For this is of the male and female sex.
</p>

<p>
She is called <q>the daughter of Matred</q>; that is, the Daughter
from that place wherein all things are bound together,
which is called AB, Father.
</p>

<p>
Also it is written, Job xxviii. 13, <q>Man knoweth not the
price thereof, neither is it found in the land of the living.</q>
</p>

<p>
She is the Daughter of Aima, the Mother; from Whose side
the judgments are applied which strive against all things.
</p>

<p>
<q>The Daughter of Mizaheb;</q> because She hath nourishment
from the two Countenances (Chokmah and Binah,
which are within Kether); and shineth with two colors&mdash;namely
<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>
from <hi rend='smallcaps'>ChSD</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Chesed</hi>, Mercy;
and from DIN, <hi rend='italic'>Din</hi>, Judgment.
</p>

<p>
For before the world was established Countenance beheld
not Countenance.<note place='foot'>See <q>Book of Concealed Mystery,</q>
chap. i. §§ 2, 3, 4 et. seq.</note>
</p>

<p>
And therefore were the Prior Worlds destroyed, for the
Prior Worlds were formed without (equilibrated) conformation.
</p>

<p>
But these which existed not in conformation are called vibrating
flames and sparks, like as when the worker in stone
striketh sparks from the flint with his hammer, or as when
the smith smiteth the iron and dasheth forth sparks on every
side.
</p>

<p>
And these sparks which fly forth flame and scintillate, but
shortly they are extinguished. And these are called the Prior
Worlds.
</p>

<p>
And therefore have they been destroyed, and persist not,
until the Most Holy Ancient One can be conformed, and the
workman can proceed unto His work.
</p>

<p>
And therefore have we related in our discourse that that ray
sendeth forth sparks upon sparks in 320 directions.
</p>

<p>
And those sparks are called the Prior Worlds, and suddenly
they perished.
</p>

<p>
Then proceeded the workman unto His work, and was conformed,
namely as Male and Female.
</p>

<p>
And those sparks became extinct and died, but now all
things subsist.
</p>

<p>
From a Light-Bearer of insupportable brightness proceeded
a Radiating<note place='foot'>Compare this with Miölner, the hammer
of Thor, of Scandinavian mythology.</note> Flame, dashing off like a vast and mighty
hammer those sparks which were the Prior Worlds.
</p>

<p>
And with most subtle ether were these intermingled and
bound mutually together, but only when they were conjoined
together, even the Great Father and Great Mother.
</p>

<p>
From <hi rend='italic'>Hoa</hi>, Himself, is AB, the Father;
and from <hi rend='italic'>Hoa</hi>, Himself,
is Ruach, the Spirit; Who are hidden in the Ancient of
Days, and therein is that ether concealed.
</p>

<p>
And It was connected with a light-bearer, which went forth
from that Light-Bearer of insupportable brightness, which is
hidden in the Bosom of Aima, the Great Mother.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='335'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XI'/>
<head>Chapter XI: Concerning the Brain of Microprosopus and Its Connections</head>

<p>
And when both can be conjoined and bound together
mutually (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the Father and the Mother), there proceedeth
thenceforth a certain hard Skull.
</p>

<p>
And it is extended on its sides, so that there may be one part
on one side, and another one on another side.
</p>

<p>
For as the Most Holy Ancient One is found to include
equally in Himself the Three Heads,<note place='foot'>Chokmah and Binah, included in
Kether.</note> so all things are symbolized
under the form of the Three Heads, as we have stated.
</p>

<p>
Into this skull (of Microprosopus) distilleth the dew from
the White Head (of Macroprosopus), and covereth it.
</p>

<p>
And that dew appeareth to be of two colors, and by it is
nourished the field of the holy apple trees.
</p>

<p>
And from this dew of this Skull is the manna prepared for
the just in the world to come.<note place='foot'>It is to be noted that this word is
MNA, Manna, and is a Metathesis of the letters of AMN, Amen, which has
been shown in the <q>Book of Concealed Mystery</q> to be equal by Gematria to
IHVH ADNI.</note>
</p>

<p>
And by it shall the dead be raised to life.
</p>

<p>
But that manna hath not at any other time been prepared
so that it might descend from this dew, save at that time when
the Israelites were wandering in the wilderness, and the Ancient
One supplied them with food from this place; because
that afterward it did not fall out so more fully.
</p>

<p>
This is the same which is said, Exod. xvi. 4, <q>Behold I rain
upon you bread from heaven.</q> And also that passage where
it is thus written, Gen. xxvii. 28, <q>And the Elohim shall give
unto thee of the dew of heaven.</q>
</p>

<p>
These things occur in that time. Concerning another time
it is written, <q>The food of man is from God the Most Holy
One&mdash;blessed be He!</q>&mdash;and that dependeth from MZLA,
<hi rend='italic'>Mezla</hi>, the Influence; assuredly from the Influence rightly so
called.
</p>

<p>
And therefore is it customary to say, <q>Concerning children,
life, and nourishment, the matter dependeth not from merit,
<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/>
but from the Influence.</q> For all these things depend from this
Influence, as we have already shown.
</p>

<p>
Nine thousand myriads of worlds receive influence from and
are upheld by that <hi rend='smallcaps'>GVLGLThA</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Golgeltha</hi>, Skull.
</p>

<p>
And in all things is that subtle AVIRA, <hi rend='italic'>Auira</hi>,
Ether,<note place='foot'>Astral Light.</note> contained,
as It Itself containeth all things, and as in It all things
are comprehended.
</p>

<p>
His countenance is extended in two sides,<note place='foot'>Right and left;
while in Macroprosopus <q>all is right.</q></note> in two lights,
which in themselves contain all things.
</p>

<p>
And when His countenance (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, that of Microprosopus)
looketh back upon the countenance of the Most Holy Ancient
One, all things are called ARK APIM, <hi rend='italic'>Arikh Aphim</hi>, Vastness
of Countenance.
</p>

<p>
What is ARK APIM, or Vastness of Countenance? Also
it should rather be called ARVK APIM, <hi rend='italic'>Arokh Aphim</hi>, Vast
in Countenance.
</p>

<p>
Assuredly thus is the tradition, since also He prolongeth
His wrath against the wicked. But the phrase ARK APIM,
<hi rend='italic'>Arikh Aphim</hi>, also implies the same as <q>healing power of
countenance.</q>
</p>

<p>
Seeing that health is never found in the world save when
the countenances (of Macroprosopus and Microprosopus)
mutually behold each other.
</p>

<p>
In the hollow of the Skull (of Microprosopus) shine three
lights. And although thou canst call them three, yet notwithstanding
are there four,<note place='foot'>At first sight this seems a contradiction,
but on careful examination the difficulty disappears. A triangle is a fit
expression of the number 3. It has three angles, it has three sides; but
there is the whole figure itself also, which is the synthesis of the sides and
the angles. So there are the three angles and the whole figure itself which contains
them, and thus completes the Trinity by the Quaternary: in the
Tetragrammaton, IHV, and H final, which forms the synthesis.</note>
as we have before said.
</p>

<p>
He (Microprosopus) is the heir of His Father and of His
Mother, and there are two inheritances from Them; all which
things are bound together under the symbol of the Crown of
His Head. And they are the phylacteries of His Head.
</p>

<p>
After that these are united together after a certain manner
they shine, and go forth into the Three Cavities of the
Skull.
</p>

<p>
(And then) singly they are developed each after its own manner,
and they are extended through the whole body.
</p>

<pb n='337'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>

<p>
But they are associated together in two Brains, and the
third Brain containeth the others in itself.<note place='foot'>Thus rigidly following
out the rule of the symbolism before given, that Chokmah and Binah are contained in
Kether. In this is the key of all religions.</note>
</p>

<p>
And it adhereth as well to the one side as to the other, and
is expanded throughout the whole body.
</p>

<p>
And therefrom are formed two colors mixed together in
one, and His countenance shineth.
</p>

<p>
And the colors of His countenance are symbols of Ab (the
Father) and Aima (the Mother), and are called Däath (Knowledge)
in Däath.
</p>

<p>
As it is written, 1 Sam. ii. 3, <q>Since El Daoth (plural) is
Tetragrammaton,</q> because in Him there are two colors.
</p>

<p>
Unto Him (Microprosopus) are works ascribed diversely;
but to the Most Holy Ancient One (operations) are not ascribed
diversely.
</p>

<p>
For what reason doth He (Microprosopus) admit of variable
disposition? Because He is the heir of two inheritances
(<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, from Chokmah and Binah).
</p>

<p>
Also it is written, Ps. xviii. 26, <q>With the merciful man thou
shalt show thyself merciful.</q>
</p>

<p>
But also truly and rightly have the Companions decided
concerning that saying where it is written, Gen. xxix. 12,
<q>And Jacob declared unto Rachel that he was her father's
brother, and that he was Rebekah's son.</q>
</p>

<p>
It is written <q>Rebekah's son,</q> and not <q>the son of Isaac.</q>
And all the mysteries are in
Chokmah.<note place='foot'><hi rend='smallcaps'>BChKMThA</hi>, Be-Chokmatha;
<hi rend='smallcaps'>ChKMThA</hi> is the emphatic Chaldee form of
<hi rend='smallcaps'>ChKMA</hi>, which is Chaldee for Hebrew
<hi rend='smallcaps'>ChKMH</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
And therefore is (Chokmah) called the Perfection of all;
and to it is ascribed the name of Truth.
</p>

<p>
And therefore is it written, <q>And Jacob declared,</q> and not
written, <q>and Jacob said.</q>
</p>

<p>
Those (two) colors are extended throughout the whole
Body (of Microprosopus), and His Body cohereth with them.
</p>

<p>
In the Most Holy Ancient One, the Concealed with all Concealments,
(things) are not ascribed diversely, and unto Him
do they not tend (diversely), since the whole is the same (with
itself) and (thus is) life unto all (things); and from Him judgment
dependeth not (directly).
</p>

<pb n='338'/><anchor id='Pg338'/>

<p>
But concerning Him (Microprosopus) it is written, that
unto Him are ascribed (diverse) works, properly speaking.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XII'/>
<head>Chapter XII: Concerning the Hair of Microprosopus</head>

<p>
From the skull of the Head (of Microprosopus) depend all
those chiefs and leaders (otherwise, all those thousands and
tens of thousands), and also from the locks of the hair.
</p>

<p>
Which are black, and mutually bound together, and which
mutually cohere.
</p>

<p>
But they adhere unto the Supernal Light from the Father,
AB, <hi rend='italic'>Ab</hi>, which surroundeth His Head
(<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, that of Microprosopus);
and unto the Brain, which is illuminated from the
Father.
</p>

<p>
Thencefrom, even from the light which surroundeth His
Head (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, that of Microprosopus) from the Mother, Aima,
and from the second Brain, proceed long locks upon locks (of
hair).
</p>

<p>
And all adhere unto and are bound together with those
locks<note place='foot'>That is, the locks which have their
origin in the influence of the Great Mother are interwoven mutually with
those which originate from Chokmah.</note> which have their connection with the Father.
</p>

<p>
And because (these locks are) mutually intermingled with
each other, and mutually intertwined with each other, hence
all the Brains are connected with the Supernal Brain (of Macroprosopus).
</p>

<p>
And hence all the regions which proceed from the Three
Cavities of the Skull are mingled mutually together, as well
pure as impure, and all those accents and mysteries are as well
hidden as manifest.
</p>

<p>
And since all the Brains have a secret connection with the
ears of Tetragrammaton, in the same way as they shine in the
crown of the Head, and enter into the hollow places of the
Skull.
</p>

<p>
Hence all these locks hang over and cover the sides of the
ears, as we have elsewhere said.
</p>

<p>
And therefore is it written, 2 Kings xix. 16, <q>Incline, O
Tetragrammaton, Thine ear, and hear!</q>
</p>

<pb n='339'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>

<p>
Hence is the meaning of this passage, which is elsewhere
given, <q>If any man wisheth the King to incline His ear unto
him, let him raise<note place='foot'>Meaning, let him supplicate Macroprosopus,
developed in the forms of Chokmah and Binah, which are summed
up in Aima the Great Mother, to incline Microprosopus to be favorable. This is
identical with the Catholic custom of invoking the intercession of the Virgin
with her Son; for Mary = Mare = Sea;and the great Sea is Binah.</note>
the head of the King and remove the hair
from above the ears; then shall the King hear him in all things
whatsoever he desireth.</q>
</p>

<p>
In the parting of the hair a certain path is connected with
the (same) path of the Ancient of Days, and therefrom are
distributed all the paths of the precepts of the Law.
</p>

<p>
And over these (locks of hair) are set all the Lords of Lamentation
and Wailing; and they depend from the single locks.
</p>

<p>
And these spread a net for sinners, so that they may not
comprehend those paths.
</p>

<p>
This is that which is said, Prov. iv. 18, <q>The path of the
wicked is as darkness.</q>
</p>

<p>
And these all depend from the rigid locks; hence also these
are entirely rigid, as we have before said.
</p>

<p>
In the softer (locks) adhere the Lords of Equilibrium, as it
is written, Ps. xxv. 10, <q>All the paths of Tetragrammaton
are <hi rend='smallcaps'>ChSD</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Chesed</hi>, and
<hi rend='smallcaps'>AMTh</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Emeth</hi>, Mercy and Truth.</q>
</p>

<p>
And thus when these developments of the Brain emanate
from the Concealed Brain, hencefrom each singly deriveth its
own nature.
</p>

<p>
From the one Brain the Lords of Equilibrium proceed
through those softer locks, as it is written, Ps. xxv. 10, <q>All
the paths of Tetragrammaton are Chesed and Emeth.</q>
</p>

<p>
From the second Brain the Lords of Lamentation and
Wailing proceed through those rigid locks and depend (from
them). Concerning whom it is written, Prov. iv. 19, <q>The
path of the wicked is as darkness; they know not wherein
they stumble.</q>
</p>

<p>
What is this passage intended to imply? Assuredly the
sense of these words: <q>they know not,</q> is this: <q>They do
not know, and they do not wish to know.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Wherein they stumble.</q> Do not read <q>BMH, <hi rend='italic'>Bameh</hi>,
wherein,</q> but <q>BAIMA, <hi rend='italic'>Be-Aima</hi>, in Aima, the Mother,</q>
they stumble; that is, through those who are attributed unto
the side of the Mother.
</p>

<pb n='340'/><anchor id='Pg340'/>

<p>
What is the side of the Mother? Severe Rigor, whereunto
are attributed the Lords of Lamentation and Wailing.
</p>

<p>
From the third Brain the Lords of Lords proceed through
those locks arranged in the middle condition (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, partly hard
and partly soft), and depend (therefrom); and they are called
the Luminous and the Non-Luminous Countenances.
</p>

<p>
And concerning these it is written, Prov. iv. 26, <q>Ponder the
path of thy feet.</q>
</p>

<p>
And all these are found in those locks of the hair of the
Head.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XIII'/>
<head>Chapter XIII: Concerning the Forehead of Microprosopus</head>

<p>
The forehead of the Skull (of Microprosopus) is the forehead
for visiting sinners (otherwise, for rooting out sinners).
</p>

<p>
And when that forehead is uncovered there are excited the
Lords of Judgments against those who are shameless in their
deeds.
</p>

<p>
This forehead hath a rosy redness. But at that time when the
forehead of the Ancient One is uncovered over against this
forehead, the latter appeareth white as snow.
</p>

<p>
And that time is called the Time of Grace for all.
</p>

<p>
In the <q>Book of the Teaching of the School of Rav Yeyeva
the Elder</q> it is said: The forehead is according as the forehead<note place='foot'>The
word translated <q>forehead</q> is <hi rend='smallcaps'>MTzCh</hi>, Metzach; now if a
metathesis be formed of this word by placing the last letter between the first and second
letters, we get <hi rend='smallcaps'>MChTz</hi>, <q>he shall smite.</q> Hence the first
form symbolizes Mercy, and the second Severity.</note>
of the Ancient One. Otherwise, the letter <hi rend='italic'>Cheth</hi>,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ch</hi>, is placed between the other two letters, according to this
passage, Num. xxiv. 17, <q><hi rend='smallcaps'>VMChTz</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Ve-Machetz</hi>, and shall smite the corners of Moab?</q>
</p>

<p>
And we have elsewhere said that it is also called <hi rend='smallcaps'>NTzCh</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Netzach</hi>, the neighboring letters (M and N, neighboring letters
in the alphabet, that is, and allied in sense, for <hi rend='italic'>Mem</hi> = Water,
and <hi rend='italic'>Nun</hi> = Fish, that which lives in the water) being
counter-changed. (<hi rend='italic'>Netzach</hi> = Victory, and is the seventh Sephira.)
</p>

<p>
But many are the <hi rend='smallcaps'>NTzChIM</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Netzachim</hi>,
Victories;<note place='foot'>And therefore is the divine name of
Tzabaoth, or hosts, attributed both to Netzach and to Hod, the seventh and
eighth Sephiroth.</note> so
<pb n='341'/><anchor id='Pg341'/>
that another (development of) Netzach may be elevated into
another path, and other Netzachim may be given which are
extended throughout the whole body (of Microprosopus).
</p>

<p>
But on the day of the Sabbath, at the time of the afternoon
prayers, the forehead of the Most Holy Ancient One is uncovered,
so that the judgments may not be aroused.
</p>

<p>
And all the judgments are subjected; and although they be
there, yet are they not called forth. (Otherwise, and they are
appeased.)
</p>

<p>
From this forehead depend twenty-four tribunals, for all
those who are shameless in their deeds.
</p>

<p>
And it is written, Ps. lxxiii. 11: <q>And they have said, <q>How
can El know? and is there knowledge in the Most High?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
But truly (the tribunals) are only twenty; wherefore are
four added? Assuredly, in respect of the punishments of the
inferior tribunals which depend from the Supernals.
</p>

<p>
Therefore there remain twenty.<note place='foot'>And 20 is H, He, in the four worlds,
for H = 5, which multiplied by 4 = 20.</note> And therefore unto none
do they adjudge capital punishment until he shall have fulfilled
and reached the age of twenty years, in respect of these twenty
tribunals.
</p>

<p>
But in our doctrine regarding our Arcana have we taught
that the books which are contained in the Law refer back unto
these twenty-four.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XIV'/>
<head>Chapter XIV: Concerning the Eyes of Microprosopus</head>

<p>
The Eyes of the Head (of Microprosopus) are those eyes
from which sinners cannot guard themselves; the eyes which
sleep, and yet which sleep not.
</p>

<p>
And therefore are they called <q>Eyes like unto doves,
KIVNIM, <hi rend='italic'>Ke-Ionim</hi>.</q> What is IVNIM,
<hi rend='italic'>Ionim</hi>? Surely it is said, Lev. xxv. 17,
<q>Ye shall not deceive any man his neighbor.</q>
</p>

<p>
And therefore is it written, Ps. xciv. 7, <q>IH, <hi rend='italic'>Yah</hi>, shall
not behold.</q> And shortly after verse 9, <q>He that planteth the
ear, shall He not hear? He that formeth the eye, shall He not
see?</q>
</p>

<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>

<p>
The part which is above the eyes (the eyebrows) consisteth
of the hairs, which are distributed in certain proportions.
</p>

<p>
From those hairs depend 1,700 Lords of Inspection for striving
in battles. And then all their emissaries arise and unclose
the eyes.
</p>

<p>
In the skin which is above the eyes (the eyelids) are the eyelashes,
and thereunto adhere thousand thousands Lords of
Shields.
</p>

<p>
And these be called the covering of the eyes. And all those
which are called (under the classification of) the eyes of IHVH,
Tetragrammaton, are not unclosed, nor awake, save in that
time when these coverings of the eyelashes be separated from
each other; namely, the lower from the upper (eyelashes).
</p>

<p>
And when the lower eyelashes are separated from the upper,
and disclose the abode of vision, then are the eyes opened in
the same manner as when one awaketh from his sleep.
</p>

<p>
Then are the eyes rolled around, and (Microprosopus)
looketh back upon the open eye (of Macroprosopus), and they
are bathed in its white brilliance.
</p>

<p>
And when they are thus whitened, the Lords of the Judgments
are turned aside from the Israelites. And therefore it is
written, Ps. xliv. 24: <q>Awake: wherefore sleepest thou, O
Tetragrammaton? Make haste,</q> etc.
</p>

<p>
Four colors appear in those eyes; from which shine the four
coverings of the phylacteries, which shine through the emanations
of the Brain.
</p>

<p>
Seven, which are called the eyes of Tetragrammaton, and
the inspection, proceed from the black color of the eyes; as we
have said.
</p>

<p>
As it is written, Zech. iii. 9, <q>Upon one stone seven eyes.</q>
And these colors flame forth on this side.
</p>

<p>
From the red go forth others, the Lords of Examination for
Judgment.
</p>

<p>
And these are called: <q>The eyes of Tetragrammaton going
forth throughout the whole earth.</q>
</p>

<p>
Where it is said (in the feminine gender) <q><hi rend='smallcaps'>MShVTTVTh</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Meshotetoth</hi>, going forth,</q> and not
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>MShVTTIM</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Meshotetim</hi>,</q>
in the masculine, because all are judgment.
</p>

<p>
From the yellow proceed others who are destined to make
manifest deeds as well good as evil.
</p>

<pb n='343'/><anchor id='Pg343'/>

<p>
As it is written, Job xxxiv. 21, <q>Since His eyes are upon
the ways of man.</q> And these, Zach. iv. 10, are called <q>The
eyes of Tetragrammaton,</q> <hi rend='smallcaps'>MShVTTIM</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Meshotetim</hi>, going
forth around, but in the masculine gender, because these extend
in two directions&mdash;toward the good and toward the evil.
</p>

<p>
From the white brilliance proceed all those mercies and all
those benefits which are found in the world, so that through
them it may be well for the Israelites.
</p>

<p>
And then all those three colors are made white, so that He
may have pity upon them.
</p>

<p>
And those colors are mingled together mutually, and mutually
do they adhere unto each other. Each one affecteth with
its color that which is next unto it.
</p>

<p>
Excepting the white brilliance wherein all are comprehended
when there is need, for this enshroudeth them all.
</p>

<p>
So therefore no man can convert all the inferior colors&mdash;the
black, red, and yellow&mdash;into the white brilliance.
</p>

<p>
For only with this glance (of Macroprosopus) are they all
united and transformed into the white brilliance.
</p>

<p>
His eyelashes (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, those of Microprosopus, for to the eye of
Macroprosopus neither eyebrows nor eyelashes are attributed)
are not found, when (his eyes) desire to behold the colors;
seeing that his eyelashes disclose the place (of sight) for beholding
all the colors.
</p>

<p>
And if they disclose not the place (of vision) the (eyes)
cannot see nor consider.<note place='foot'>The simple meaning of this and the
preceding section is, that the eyes can only see when the upper eyelashes are
separated from the lower ones by the lids being raised.</note>
</p>

<p>
But the eyelashes do not remain nor sleep, save in that only
perfect hour, but they are opened and closed, and again closed
and opened, according to that Open Eye (of Macroprosopus)
which is above them.
</p>

<p>
And therefore is it written, Ezek. i. 14, <q>And the living
creatures rush forth and return.</q>
</p>

<p>
Now we have already spoken of the passage, Isa. xxxiii. 20,
<q>Thine eye shall see Jerusalem quiet, even Thy habitation.</q>
</p>

<p>
Also it is written, Deut. ii. 12, <q>The eyes of Tetragrammaton
thy God are ever thereon in the beginning of the year,</q> etc.
</p>

<p>
For so Jerusalem requireth it, since it is written, Isa. i. 21,
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>TzDQ</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Tzedeq</hi>,
Justice abideth in Her.</q>
</p>

<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/>

<p>
And therefore (is it called) Jerusalem, and not Zion. For
it is written, Isa. i. 26: <q>Zion is redeemed in <hi rend='smallcaps'>MShPT</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Meshephat</hi>,
Judgment, etc.,</q> which are unmixed mercies.
</p>

<p>
Thine eye: (therefore) is it written OINK, <hi rend='italic'>Ayinakh</hi> (in
the singular number). Assuredly it is the eye of the Most Holy
Ancient One, the Most Concealed of All (which is here referred
to).
</p>

<p>
Now it is said, <q>The eyes of Tetragrammaton thy God are
thereon</q>; in good, that is to say, and in evil; according as
either the red color or the yellow is required.
</p>

<p>
But only with the glance (of Macroprosopus) are all things
converted and cleansed into the white brilliance.
</p>

<p>
The eyelids (of Microprosopus) are not found when (His
eyes) desire to behold the colors. But here (it is said), <q>Thine
eyes shall behold Jerusalem.</q> Entirely for good, entirely in
mercy.
</p>

<p>
As it is written, Isa. liv. 7, <q>And with great mercies will I
gather thee.</q>
</p>

<p>
The eyes of Tetragrammaton thy God are ever thereon from
the beginning of the year. Here the word <q><hi rend='smallcaps'>MRShITh</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Merashith</hi>, from the beginning,</q> is written defectively without
A, for it is not written <hi rend='smallcaps'>RAShITh</hi> with the A.
</p>

<p>
Hence it remaineth not always in the same condition. What
doth not? The inferior H, <hi rend='italic'>He</hi> (of IHVH).
</p>

<p>
And concerning that which is supernal it is written, Lam. ii.
1: <q>He hath cast down MShMIM, <hi rend='italic'>Me-Shamaim</hi>, from the
heavens; <hi rend='smallcaps'>ARTz</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Aretz</hi>, the earth,
the Tiphereth, Israel.</q>
</p>

<p>
Wherefore hath he cast down Aretz from Shamaim? Because
it is written, Isa. l. 3, <q>I will cover the heavens, Shamaim,
with darkness,</q> and with the blackness of the eye (of Microprosopus),
namely, with the black color, are they covered.
</p>

<p>
<q>From the beginning of the year.</q> What, then, is that place
whence those eyes of Tetragrammaton behold Jerusalem?
</p>

<p>
Therefore he<note place='foot'>Moses, in this passage of Deuteronomy.</note>
hasteneth to expound this (saying immediately),
<q>From the beginning, <hi rend='smallcaps'>MRShITh</hi>, of the year,</q> which
(word <q><hi rend='italic'><hi rend='smallcaps'>MRShITH</hi></hi></q> being written
thus), without the Aleph, A,<note place='foot'>That is,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>MRShITh</hi>, instead of <hi rend='smallcaps'>MRAShITh</hi>.</note>
symbolizeth judgment; for judgment is referred unto that
side, although virtually (the word <q>Merashith</q>) is not judgment.
</p>

<pb n='345'/><anchor id='Pg345'/>

<p>
<q>Even unto the end of the year.</q> Herein, properly speaking,
is judgment found. For it is written, Isa. i. 21, <q>Justice
dwelt in her.</q> For this is <q>the end of the year.</q>
</p>

<p>
Come and see! A, <hi rend='italic'>Aleph</hi>, only is called the first (letter).
In A, <hi rend='italic'>Aleph</hi>, is the masculine power hidden and concealed; that
namely, which is not known.
</p>

<p>
When this Aleph is conjoined in another place, then is it
called <hi rend='smallcaps'>RAShITh</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Rashith</hi>, beginning.
</p>

<p>
But if thou sayest that (<hi rend='italic'>A</hi>) is conjoined
herewith,<note place='foot'>That is, irrevocably, so that the word
would cease to bear the same meaning were A not there. In other words, were
A a radical letter of it.</note> truly it is not so, but (<hi rend='italic'>A</hi>)
is only manifested therein and illuminateth it; and in that case only is it called
<hi rend='smallcaps'>RAShITh</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Rashith</hi>, beginning.
</p>

<p>
Now therefore in this (passage) <hi rend='smallcaps'>RAShITh</hi> (spelt with the
A) is not found as regards Jerusalem; for were (the letter A)
herein, it would (denote that it would) remain forever.
</p>

<p>
Hence it is written defectively <hi rend='smallcaps'>MRShITh</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Me-Rashith</hi>. Also concerning the world to come it is written,
Isa. xli. 27,<note place='foot'>The first, <hi rend='smallcaps'>RAShVN</hi>, Rashon,
where this word, derived from the same root as <hi rend='smallcaps'>RAShITh</hi>,
is spelt with A.</note> <q>The first shall say to Zion, Behold, behold them,</q> etc.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XV'/>
<head>Chapter XV: Concerning the Nose of Microprosopus</head>

<p>
The nose of Microprosopus is the form of His countenance,
for therethrough is His whole countenance known.
</p>

<p>
This nose is not as the nose of the Most Holy Ancient One,
the Concealed with all Concealments.
</p>

<p>
For the nose of Him, the Ancient One, is the life of lives for
all things, and from His two nostrils rush forth the <hi rend='italic'>Ruachin
De-Chiin</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>RVChIN DChIIN</hi>, spirits of lives for all.
</p>

<p>
But concerning this (nose of) Microprosopus it is written,
Ps. xviii. 9, <q>A smoke ascendeth in His nose.</q>
</p>

<p>
In this smoke all the colors are contained. In each color are
contained multitudes of lords of most rigorous judgment, who
are all comprehended in that smoke.
</p>

<p>
Whence all those are not mitigated save by the smoke of the
inferior altar.
</p>

<pb n='346'/><anchor id='Pg346'/>

<p>
Hence it is written, Gen. viii. 21, <q>And IHVH smelled a
sweet savor.</q> It is not written (He smelled) the odor of the
sacrifice. What is <q>sweet</q> save <q>rest</q>? Assuredly the
spirit at rest is the mitigation of the Lords of Judgment.
</p>

<p>
(When therefore it is said) <q>And IHVH smelled the odor
of rest,</q> most certainly the odor of the sacrificed victim is not
meant, but the odor of the mitigation of all those severities
which are referred unto the nose.
</p>

<p>
And all things which adhere unto them, all things, I say, are
mitigated. But most of these severities mutually cohere.
</p>

<p>
As it is written, Ps. cvi. 2, <q>Who shall recount <hi rend='smallcaps'>GBVRVTh</hi>
IHVH, the Geburoth of Tetragrammaton?</q>
</p>

<p>
And this nose (of Microprosopus) emitteth fire from the two
nostrils, which swalloweth up all other fires.
</p>

<p>
From the one nostril (goeth forth) the smoke, and from the
other nostril the fire, and they both are found on the altar, as
well the fire as the smoke.
</p>

<p>
But when He the most Holy Ancient One is unveiled, all
things are at peace. This is that which is said, Isa. xlviii. 9,
<q>And for My praise will I refrain from thee</q> (literally, <q>block
up thy nostrils</q><note place='foot'>The Hebrew idiom for having mercy
always refers to the nose, as <q>to defer anger</q> is in Hebrew <q>to lengthen the
nose,</q> etc.</note>).
</p>

<p>
The nose of the Most Holy Ancient One is long and extended,
and He is called Arikh Aphim, Long of Nose.
</p>

<p>
But this nose (of Microprosopus) is short, and when the
smoke commenceth, it issueth rapidly forth, and judgment is
consummated.
</p>

<p>
But who can oppose the nose of Him the Ancient One? Concerning
this, all things are as we have said in the Greater Assembly,
where concerning this matter the Companions were
exercised.
</p>

<p>
In the book of the treatise of Rav Hamenuna the Elder he
thus describeth these two nostrils (of Microprosopus), saying
that from the one proceed the smoke and the fire, and from the
other, peace and the beneficent spirits.
</p>

<p>
That is, when (Microprosopus) is considered as having (in
Himself the symbolism of) right side and left side. As it is
written, Hosea xiv. 7, <q>And his smell like Lebanon.</q>
</p>

<p>
And concerning His Bride it is written, Cant. vii. 9, <q>And
<pb n='347'/><anchor id='Pg347'/>
the smell of thy nostril like apples.</q> Which if it be true concerning
the Bride, how much more concerning Himself? And
this is a notable saying.
</p>

<p>
When therefore it is said, <q>And Tetragrammaton smelled the
odor of peace,</q> the word <q><hi rend='smallcaps'>HNIChCh</hi>,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Ha-Nichach</hi>, of peace,
can be understood in a double sense.
</p>

<p>
One sense is primary, when the Most Holy Ancient One, the
Concealed with all Concealments, is manifested; for HVA, <hi rend='italic'>Hoa</hi>,
He, is the peace and mitigation of all things.
</p>

<p>
And the other respecteth the inferior mitigation, which is
done through the smoke and fire of the altar.
</p>

<p>
And because of this duplicate meaning is the word <hi rend='smallcaps'>NIChCh</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Nichach</hi>, written with a double <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ch</hi>.
And all these things are said concerning Microprosopus.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XVI'/>
<head>Chapter XVI: Concerning the Ears of Microprosopus</head>

<p>
There are two ears for hearing the good and the evil, and
these two can be reduced into one.
</p>

<p>
As it is written, 2 Kings xix. 18, <q>Incline, O Tetragrammaton,
Thine ear, and hear.</q>
</p>

<p>
The ear from within dependeth upon certain curves which
are therein formed, so that the speech may be made clearer before
its entrance into the brain.
</p>

<p>
And the brain examineth it, but not with haste. For every
matter which is accomplished in haste cometh not from perfect
wisdom.
</p>

<p>
From those ears depend all the Lords of Wings who receive
the Voice of the Universe; and all those are called thus, the
Ears of Tetragrammaton.
</p>

<p>
Concerning whom it is written, Eccles. x. 20, <q>For a bird
of the air shall carry the voice,</q> etc.
</p>

<p>
<q>For a bird of the air shall carry the voice.</q> This text hath
a difficult (meaning). And now (for so much is expressed)
whence is the voice?
</p>

<p>
For in the beginning of the verse it is written: <q>Curse not the
King even in thy thought.</q> Where it is written concerning
<pb n='348'/><anchor id='Pg348'/>
even the (unexpressed) thought, and concerning the secret
thoughts of thy couch.
</p>

<p>
Wherefore? Because <q>a bird of the air shall carry the
voice.</q> Which (voice) as yet is unexpressed.
</p>

<p>
Assuredly this is the true meaning. Whatsoever a man
thinketh and meditateth in his heart, he maketh not a word
until he bringeth it forth with his lips. (What the text intendeth
is) if any man attendeth not hereunto.
</p>

<p>
For that voice sent forward (from inconsiderate thought)
cleaveth the air, and it goeth forth and ascendeth, and is carried
around through the universe; and therefore is the voice.
</p>

<p>
And the Lords of Wings receive the voice and bear it on unto
the King (Microprosopus), so that it may enter into His ears.
</p>

<p>
This is that which standeth written, Deut. v. 28, <q>And
Tetragrammaton hath heard the voice of your words.</q> Again,
Num. xi. 1, <q>And Tetragrammaton heard, and His wrath was
kindled.</q>
</p>

<p>
Hence every prayer and petition which a man poureth forth
before God the Most Holy One&mdash;blessed be He!&mdash;requireth
this, that he pronounce the words with his lips.
</p>

<p>
For if he pronounce them not, his prayer is no prayer, and
his petition is no petition.
</p>

<p>
But as far as the words go forth, they cleave the air asunder,
and ascend, and fly on, and from them is the voice made; and
that which receiveth the one receiveth also the other, and beareth
it into the Holy Place in the head of the King (otherwise, beneath
Kether, the Crown).
</p>

<p>
From the three cavities (of the brain of Microprosopus) distilleth
a certain distillation, and it is called the Brook. As it is
said in 1 Kings xvii. 3, <q>The brook Kherith,</q> as it were an excavation
or channel of the ears.
</p>

<p>
And the voice entereth into that curved passage, and remaineth
in that brook of that distillation.
</p>

<p>
And then is it therein detained, and examined, whether it be
good or whether it be evil. This is the same which is said, Job
xxxiv. 3, <q>Because the ear examineth the words.</q>
</p>

<p>
For what cause doth the ear examine the words? Because
the voice is detained in that brook distilling into the curved
passage of the ears, and doth not swiftly enter into the body,
and thereunto is an examination instituted between the good
and the evil.
</p>

<pb n='349'/><anchor id='Pg349'/>

<p>
<q>As the palate tasteth meat.</q> Wherefore can the palate taste
meat? Because in the same manner it causeth it to delay, and
(the meat) doth not enter so rapidly into the body. And hence
(the palate) proveth and tasteth it (to discern) whether it be
sweet and pleasant.
</p>

<p>
From this opening of the ears depend other openings,
(namely) the opening of the eye, the opening of the mouth,
the opening of the nose.
</p>

<p>
From that voice which entereth into the opening of the ears,
if it be necessary (a certain part) entereth into the opening of
the eyes, and these pour forth tears.
</p>

<p>
From that voice, if it be necessary (a certain part) entereth
into the opening of the nose, and from that voice it produceth
smoke and fire.
</p>

<p>
This is that which is written, Num. xi. 1, <q>And Tetragrammaton
heard, and His wrath was kindled, and the fire of Tetragrammaton
turned against them.</q>
</p>

<p>
And if it be necessary that voice goeth forth into the opening
of the mouth, and it speaketh, and determineth certain things.
</p>

<p>
From that voice are all things; from that voice (a certain
part) entereth into the whole body, and by it are all things affected.
Whence doth this matter depend? From that ear.
</p>

<p>
Blessed is he who observeth his words. Therefore is it
written, Ps. xxxiv. 13, <q>Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy
lips from speaking guile.</q>
</p>

<p>
Unto this ear is attributed hearing, and under (the idea of)
hearing are those brains comprehended.<note place='foot'>The three divisions
of the Brain of Microprosopus.</note>
</p>

<p>
Chokmah is contained therein, as it is written, 1 Kings iii.
9, <q>And wilt Thou give unto Thy servant a hearing heart.</q>
</p>

<p>
Binah also, as it is written, 1 Sam. iii. 9, <q>Speak, for Thy
servant heareth.</q> Also 2 Kings xviii. 26, <q>Because we have
heard.</q> And hencefrom all things depend.
</p>

<p>
Däath also, as it is said, Prov. iv. 10, <q>Hear, O my son, and
receive My sayings.</q> And again, <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> ii. 1,
<q>Thou shalt hide My sayings with thee.</q> And thereunto all things depend from
the ears.
</p>

<p>
From these ears depend prayers and petitions, and the opening
of the eyes.
</p>

<p>
This is the same which standeth written, 2 Kings xix. 16,
<pb n='350'/><anchor id='Pg350'/>
<q>Incline, O Tetragrammaton, Thine ear, and hear; open Thine
eyes, and see.</q> Thus all things depend hencefrom.
</p>

<p>
From this ear depend the highest Arcana, which go not forth
without, and therefore is (this ear) curved in the interior parts,
and the Arcana of Arcana are concealed therein. Woe unto him
who revealeth the Arcana!
</p>

<p>
And because the Arcana come into contact with this ear, and
follow the curvings of that region, hence the Arcana are not revealed
unto those who walk in crooked paths, but unto those
(who walk in) those which are not crooked.
</p>

<p>
Hence is it written, Ps. xxv. 14, <q>The SVD IHVH, <hi rend='italic'>Sod
Tetragrammaton</hi>, Secret of Tetragrammaton, is with them that
fear Him, and He will show them His covenant</q>; namely,
unto such as keep their path and thus receive His words.
</p>

<p>
But they who are perverse in their ways receive certain words,
and quickly introduce the same into themselves, but in them
is no place where they can be detained (for examination).
</p>

<p>
And all the other openings are opened therein, until those
words can issue forth from the opening of the mouth.
</p>

<p>
And such men are called the sinners of their generation,
hating God the Most Holy One&mdash;blessed be He.
</p>

<p>
In Mischna, or our tradition, we have taught that such men
are like unto murderers and idolaters.
</p>

<p>
And all these things are contained in one saying, where it is
written, Lev. xix. 16, <q>Thou shalt not go up and down as a
tale-bearer among thy people, neither shalt thou stand against
the blood of thy neighbor: ANI IHVH, I am Tetragrammaton.</q>
</p>

<p>
Therefore he who transgresseth the first part of that verse
doth the same as if he were to transgress the whole.
</p>

<p>
Blessed is the portion of the just, concerning whom it is
said, Prov. xi. 13, <q>A tale-bearer revealeth secrets, but he that
is of a faithful spirit concealeth the matter.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Spirit, <hi rend='smallcaps'>RVCh</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Ruach</hi>,</q>
properly (is used here) for the
Ruach of such is extracted from the Supernal Holy Place.
</p>

<p>
Now we have said that this is a symbol. Whosoever revealeth
Arcana with fixed purpose of mind, he is not of the body
of the Most Holy King.
</p>

<p>
And therefore to such a man nothing is an Arcanum, neither
is from the place of the Arcanum.
</p>

<pb n='351'/><anchor id='Pg351'/>

<p>
And whensoever his soul departeth, the same adhereth not
unto the body of the King, for it is not his place. Woe unto
that man! woe unto himself! woe unto his Neschamah!<note place='foot'>See Introduction
concerning the names of the parts of the Soul.</note>
</p>

<p>
But blessed is the portion of the just who conceal secrets, and
much more the Supernal Arcana of God the Most Holy One&mdash;blessed
be He!&mdash;the highest Arcana of the Most Holy King.
</p>

<p>
Concerning them it is written, Isa. lx. 21, <q>Thy people also
shall be all righteous; they shall inherit the land forever.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XVII'/>
<head>Chapter XVII: Concerning the Countenance of Microprosopus</head>

<p>
His countenance is as two abodes of fragrance, and all that
I have before said is His testimony.
</p>

<p>
For the testimony, <hi rend='smallcaps'>SHDVThA</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Sahedutha</hi>,
dependeth from Him, and in all His testimony dependeth.
</p>

<p>
But these places of fragrance are white and red; the testimony
of Ab the Father, and Aima the Mother; the testimony of
the inheritance which He hath taken by right and obtained.
</p>

<p>
And in our tradition we have also established by how many
thousand degrees the whiteness differeth from the redness.
</p>

<p>
But yet at once they agree together in Him in
one,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, the various degrees of the
whiteness.</note> under the
general form of the whiteness; for whensoever it is illuminated
from the light of the white brilliance of the Ancient One, then
that white brilliance overcloudeth the redness, and all things are
found to be in light.
</p>

<p>
But whensoever judgments ascend (otherwise, threaten) in
the universe, and sinners are many, leprosy is found in all things
(otherwise, throughout the universe), and the redness spreadeth
over the countenance, and overcloudeth all the whiteness.
</p>

<p>
And then all things are found in judgment, and then (He
putteth on) the vestments of zeal, which are called <q>the garments
of vengeance</q> (Isa. lix. 17), and all things depend herefrom.
</p>

<p>
And because the testimony existeth in all things, hence so
many Lords of Shields are enshrouded by those colors, and
attend upon those colors.
</p>

<pb n='352'/><anchor id='Pg352'/>

<p>
When those colors are resplendent, the worlds all and singular
exist in joy.
</p>

<p>
In that time when the white brilliance shineth all things appear
in this color; and when He appeareth in redness, similarly
all things appear in that color.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XVIII'/>
<head>Chapter XVIII: Concerning the Beard of Microprosopus</head>

<p>
In those abodes (otherwise forms) of fragrance the beard
beginneth to appear from the top of the ears, and it descendeth
and ascendeth in the place of fragrance.
</p>

<p>
The hairs of the beard are black, and beautiful in form as
in (that of) a robust youth.
</p>

<p>
The oil of dignity of the supernal beard of the Ancient One
(floweth down) in this beard of Microprosopus.
</p>

<p>
The beautiful arrangement of this beard is divided into nine
parts. But when the most holy oil of dignity of the Most Holy
Ancient One sendeth down rays into this beard, its parts are
found to be twenty-two.<note place='foot'>Answering to the number of the letters
of the Hebrew alphabet, which together with the ten Sephiroth form the
thirty-two paths of wisdom of the <q>Sepher Yetzirah.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
And then all things exist in benediction, and thence Israel the
patriarch (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, Jacob) took his blessing. And the symbol of
this is to be found in these words, Gen. xlviii. 20, <q>BK, with the
twenty-two shall Israel bless.</q> (The real translation of BK is
<q>in thee,</q> but the numerical value of BK is twenty-two; hence
the symbolism here rendered.)
</p>

<p>
We have described the conformations of the beard already,
in the Conclave of the Assembly. Here also I desire to enter
upon this matter in all humility.
</p>

<p>
Now we thus examined all the parts of the beard, that in the
Conclave of the Assembly (we found) that they were all disposed
from the parts of the beard of the Most Holy Ancient
One.
</p>

<p>
Six there are; nine they are called. For the first conformation
goeth forth through that Spark of the most refulgent Light-bearer,<note place='foot'>See
<q>Book of Concealed Mystery,</q>
chap. ii. §§ 31, 40, etc.</note>
and goeth down beneath the hair of the head, assuredly
beneath those locks which overhang the ears.
</p>

<pb n='353'/><anchor id='Pg353'/>

<p>
And it descendeth before the opening of the ears unto the
beginning of the mouth.
</p>

<p>
But this arrangement is not found in the Most Holy Ancient
One. But when that fountain of Wisdom, <hi rend='smallcaps'>ChKMThA</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Chokmatha</hi>, floweth down from MZLA,
<hi rend='italic'>Mezla</hi>, the Influence
of the Most Holy Ancient One, and dependeth from Him, and
when Aima, the Mother, ariseth, and is included in that subtle
ether, then She, Aima, assumeth that white brilliance.<note place='foot'>In the
<q>Book of Concealed Mystery,</q> chap. i. § 31, HVA and ALHIM
are shown to be interchangeable, and they both are feminine. And now we
come to the <q>Three Mothers,</q> of the <q>Sepher Yetzirah,</q> the Great Supernal
Feminine Triad, which is even before the triune father. I may say no more
here; in fact, I have almost revealed too much. Let the reader carefully
meditate on § 651, for there the indicible Arcanum is shadowed.</note>
</p>

<p>
And the Scintilla entereth and departeth, and together mutually
are They bound, and thence cometh the One Form.
</p>

<p>
And when there is need, One ariseth above the Other, and the
Other again is concealed in the presence of Its Companion.
</p>

<p>
And therefore there is need of all things; of one thing for
performing vengeance, of another for showing forth mercy.
</p>

<p>
And therefore David the king hath sought out this beard, as
we have shown already.
</p>

<p>
In this beard nine conformations are found, (among which
are) six myriads which depend among them, and are extended
throughout the whole body.
</p>

<p>
And those six which depend hang in the locks which are beneath
the abodes of fragrance, three on this side and three on
that.
</p>

<p>
And in the ornamentation of the beard hang the three remaining
(conformations); one above the lips, and two in those
locks which hang down upon the chest.
</p>

<p>
And all those six (other conformations), three on this side
and three on that side, go forth, and all depend from those locks
which hang down, and they are extended throughout the whole
body.
</p>

<p>
But on account of those three (conformations), which are
more connected with the ornament of the beard than all the
others, the Holy Name is written in its purity.
</p>

<p>
When it is written thus, Ps. cxviii. 5: <q>I invoked IH, <hi rend='italic'>Yah</hi>,
in my trouble: IH, <hi rend='italic'>Yah</hi>, heard me at large: Tetragrammaton
is with me, therefore I will not fear.</q>
</p>

<p>
But that which we have already laid down in the Conclave of
<pb n='354'/><anchor id='Pg354'/>
the Assembly concerning these words, <q>In my trouble I invoked
IH, <hi rend='italic'>Yah</hi>,</q> that this is to be referred to that place where the
beard beginneth to be extended, which place is more remote,
and before the ears, is also correct.
</p>

<p>
And in the book of the dissertation of the school of Rav
Yeyeva the Elder it is thus said and established, that the beginning
of the beard cometh from the supernal <hi rend='smallcaps'>ChSD</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Chesed</hi>, Mercy.
</p>

<p>
Concerning which it is written, <q><hi rend='smallcaps'>LK IHVH HGDVLH
VHGBVRH VHThPARTh</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Leka, Tetragrammaton; Ha-Gedulah,
Ve-Ha-Geburah, Ve-Ha-Tiphereth</hi>, Thine, O Tetragrammaton,
Gedulah, (another name for Chesed), Geburah,
and Tiphereth (the names of the fourth, fifth, and sixth Sephiroth,
which Protestants usually add to the end of the Lord's
Prayer, substituting, however, Malkuth for Gedulah), Thine,
O Tetragrammaton, are the Mercy, the Power, and the Glory
(or Beauty).</q> And all these are so, and thus it (the beard)
commenceth.
</p>

<p>
Therefore the nine (conformations) arise from and depend
from the beard; and thus it commenceth from before the ears.
But (the conformations) remain not in permanence save
through another cause, as we have before laid down.
</p>

<p>
For whensoever the universe hath need of mercy, the Influence,
Mezla, of the Ancient One is uncovered; and all those
conformations which exist in the most adorned beard of Microprosopus
are found to be entirely mercies, yet so that they can
exercise vengeance against the haters of the Israelites, and
against those who afflict them.
</p>

<p>
But the whole ornament of the beard consisteth in those locks
which hang down, because all things depend thencefrom.
</p>

<p>
All those hairs which are in the beard of Microprosopus are
hard and rigid, because they all subject the judgments when
the Most Holy Influence is manifested.
</p>

<p>
And when there is to be contention, then He appeareth like
unto a brave hero, victorious in war. And then that becometh
bare of hair which is bare of hair, and that becometh bald which
is bald.
</p>

<p>
Moses commemorated these nine conformations a second
time, Num. xiv. 17, when there was need to convert them all
into mercy.
</p>

<pb n='355'/><anchor id='Pg355'/>

<p>
For although he recite not now the thirteen conformations
(of the beard of Macroprosopus), yet from this idea the thing
depended; for he did not allow himself to enter into those
conformations simply that he might enumerate them.
</p>

<p>
But unto the Influence directed he his meditation, and made
mention thereof. As it is written, Num. xiv. 17, <q>And now,
I beseech thee, let <hi rend='smallcaps'>KCh</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Kach</hi>,
the Power of Tetragrammaton, be great!</q>
</p>

<p>
What is to be understood by <hi rend='smallcaps'>KCh, IHVH</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Kach Tetragrammaton</hi>,
the Power of Tetragrammaton? Thus is <hi rend='smallcaps'>MZLA
QDIShA</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mezla</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Qadisha</hi>,
the Holy Influence, called, even the
Concealed with all Concealments. And from the Influence that
Strength and that Light depend.
</p>

<p>
And since of this (Influence) Moses was speaking, and this
(Influence) he was commemorating, and concerning this
(Influence) he was meditating, he then immediately recited
those nine conformations which belong unto Microprosopus.
</p>

<p>
So that they all might exist in light, and that judgment might
not be found therein. And therefore this whole judgment
(otherwise, this whole beard) dependeth from the Influence.
</p>

<p>
When the hairs begin to be restrained He Himself is as the
hero of an army victorious in war.
</p>

<p>
In this beard (of Microprosopus) floweth down the oil of
dignity from the Concealed Ancient One, as it is said, Ps.
cxxxiii. 2, <q>Like excellent oil upon the head, descending upon
the beard, the beard of Aaron.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XIX'/>
<head>Chapter XIX: Concerning the Lips and Mouth of Microprosopus</head>

<p>
Those hairs cover not the lips, and the entire lips are red and
rosy. As it is written, Cant. v. 13, <q>His lips as roses.</q> (In
the ordinary version <hi rend='smallcaps'>ShVShNIM</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Shushanim</hi>, is translated <q>lilies,</q> not <q>roses.</q>
</p>

<p>
His lips murmur Geburah, Severity, but they also murmur
<hi rend='italic'>Chokmah</hi>, Wisdom.
</p>

<p>
From those lips alike depend good and evil, life and death.
</p>

<p>
From these lips depend the Lord of Vigilance. For when
those lips murmur, they all are excited to bring forth secret
<pb n='356'/><anchor id='Pg356'/>
things, as well as the Lords of Judgment in all the tribunals
wherein they have their abiding-place.
</p>

<p>
And therefore are these called the Watchers; as it is written,
Dan. iv. 17, <q>This matter is by the decree of the Watchers, and
the demand by the word of the Holy Ones.</q>
</p>

<p>
What is a Watcher? In the book of the dissertation that is
explained from this passage, 1 Sam. xxviii. 16, <q>And is become
thine enemy.</q>
</p>

<p>
Seeing that judgments are stirred up against those who obtain
not mercy from the Supernals.
</p>

<p>
Hence are those stirred up who are the lords of the enmity
of all things.
</p>

<p>
And, nevertheless, in each case are there mercy and judgment.
And therefore is it said, Dan. iv. 13, <q>A watcher and a holy
one</q>; judgment and mercy.
</p>

<p>
And between those lips when they are opened is the mouth
disclosed.
</p>

<p>
By that <hi rend='smallcaps'>RVCh</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Ruach</hi>,
breath, which goeth forth from His
mouth, many thousands and myriads are enshrouded; and when
it is extended by the same are the true prophets enfolded, and
all are called the mouth of Tetragrammaton.
</p>

<p>
When forth from His mouth the words proceed through His
lips, the same are muttered through the whole circuit of 18,000
worlds,<note place='foot'>That is the number 18 on the plane
of Asiah. And 18 is the fourth part of 72. And 72 is the number of the
Schemahamphorasch (see ante), and the number of the Quinaries or sets of five
degrees in the 360 degrees of the Zodiac. And there are six such sets in the
thirty degrees of each sign. And thus we return to the twelve signs of the Zodiac,
and these are operated on from the ten Sephiroth through the <q>seven
paths of the Queen,</q> and these again depend from the first three Sephiroth,
and these again from Kether, and Kether is Macroprosopus, from whom
backward depend the Negative Existences in their Veils; and Macroprosopus
is called HVA, Hoa, which = 12, and finds its expression in <q>Aima
Elohim.</q> Thus rusheth through the Universe the Flux and Reflux of the
Eternal Word.</note> until they are all bound together at once in the twelve
paths and the known ways. And one thing ever expecteth another.
</p>

<p>
By the tongue is the vocal expression of the sublime spoken,
in the middle nexus of the utterance.
</p>

<p>
And therefore is it written, Cant. v. 16, <q>His mouth is most
sweet.</q> And this same palate of His conveyeth a sweet taste;
wherefore He smileth when He tasteth food (which is pleasant).<note place='foot'>I am
doubtful as to whether this is the best translation of the last clause;
Rosenroth has not translated it at all. The Chaldee is <hi rend='smallcaps'>MMThQIM VDAI
MAI ChKV KDA VChIK ITOVM LAKVL</hi>, Mamthaqim Vadeai Maai Chiko Kedea Vecheik Yitauom
Leakol.</note>
</p>

<pb n='357'/><anchor id='Pg357'/>

<p>
<q>And He is altogether the desirablenesses (or delights)</q>
(of the powers of) fire and (the powers of) water, because
the fire and water are counterchanged with each other mutually
(otherwise, are conformed together), and are beautiful in
his conformation.<note place='foot'>This whole section requires comment.
I must first observe that Knorr de Rosenroth in his Latin version has
supposed that in the word <q><hi rend='smallcaps'>MChMDIM</hi>,</q>
Machemadim, fire and water (<hi rend='smallcaps'>ASh</hi> and MIM)
are hidden as in a sort of anagram. Now while it is true that
<q>MIM</q> can be thus extracted, <q><hi rend='smallcaps'>ASh</hi></q>
cannot, for the remaining letters, <hi rend='smallcaps'>ChMD</hi>,
will by no exegetical rule I know of form a word signifying fire.
The following I take to be the real meaning of the passage. Chokmah is
the fire, I, and Binah is the water, H, the Father and Mother Who, conjoined,
produce the Son. Now the fire is symbolized by a triangle with the apex
uppermost, and water by a triangle with the apex reversed; these two together
united form the sign of the Macrocosm, the external symbol of Vau, V, Microprosopus.
And He inherits the double qualities of the Father and the Mother,
shown by the word <q>delights</q> (<q>Machemadim</q>) being written in the
plural.</note>
</p>

<p>
For the colors are mutually associated together.
</p>

<p>
In His palate are the (guttural) letters (of the Hebrew
Alphabet&mdash;namely, A, H, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ch</hi>, O) formed and constructed; in
the circuit of His (mouth) are they condensed (into the palatals
G, I, K, Q).<note place='foot'><p>The letters of the Hebrew alphabet
are usually classed in the following manner:
</p>
<p>
Gutturals = A, H, Ch, O (R by some).
</p>
<p>
Palatals = G, I, K, Q.
</p>
<p>
Linguals = D, Th, T, L, N.
</p>
<p>
Dentals = Z, S, Sh, Tz (R by others).
</p>
<p>
Labials = B, V, M, P.
</p>
<p>
The <q>Sepher Yetzirah</q> further classes them as&mdash;
</p>
<p>
3 Mothers (Primitives) = A, M, Sh.
</p>
<p>
7 Duplicated = B, G, D, K, P, R, Th.
</p>
<p>
12 Simples = H, V, Z, Ch, T, I, L, N, S, O, Tz, Q.
</p>
<p>
In the above classification it classes R
as a dental.</p></note>
</p>

<p>
The letter A, <hi rend='italic'>Aleph</hi>, which cast forth the kings and constituted
the kings<note place='foot'>This section contains references to
the Edomite kings and their symbology; namely, as denoting the primal worlds
which were destroyed. (See <q>The Book of Concealed Mystery,</q> chap. i.
§ 3; <q>The Greater Holy Assembly,</q> chap. ii. and chap. xxvi.; and <q>The
Lesser Holy Assembly,</q> chap. x.</note> (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,
that guttural letter which is referred to
the First Sephira, Kether, the Crown, becometh the palatal
letter G, <hi rend='italic'>Ghimel</hi>).
</p>

<p>
The letter <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ch</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Cheth</hi>,
which goeth forth and descendeth and
ascendeth, and is crowned in the head (referring to the Second
Sephira, <hi rend='italic'>Chokmah</hi>, Wisdom), and is fire condensed in ether
(<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, developeth in the palatal letter I,
<hi rend='italic'>Yod</hi>).
</p>

<p>
The letter H, <hi rend='italic'>He</hi>, the golden-yellow color (otherwise, germinating
power) of the Mother, Aima, having been connected
with the Female Power, is extended in the Greater Female Potency
into the desire of the Holy City, which two (otherwise,
for these places) are mutually bound together the one unto the
other (these two are Aima, the supernal H of IHVH, and the
Holy City, the Bride, as She is called in the Apocalypse, the final
<pb n='358'/><anchor id='Pg358'/>
H of IHVH). (And the guttural letter H, <hi rend='italic'>He</hi>, formeth the
palatal letter <hi rend='italic'>K</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Kaph</hi>,
which is referred unto the Queen.) As
it is written, Cant. iv. 6, <q>Unto the mountain of myrrh, unto the
hill of frankincense.</q>
</p>

<p>
The letter O, <hi rend='italic'>Ayin</hi> (which denoteth the seven Inferiors which
were destroyed) is the medium of splendor of mediation (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,
the internal Light of the broken vessels), hath been formed
forth in His lips by revolution therein (and it hath been condensed
in Q, <hi rend='italic'>Qoph</hi>, which goeth forth from the middle of the
palate unto the lips). For the branches (of the Tree of Life,
namely) are connected in Him (Microprosopus) in the spirits
(such as they were in the prior world) formed forth (such as
they are in the restored world).
</p>

<p>
For in the mysteries of the letters of Solomon the King, those
four letters, A, H, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ch</hi>, O, are surrounded by GIKQ.
</p>

<p>
But it is written in Job. vi. 6, <q>Can that which is unsavory
be eaten without salt?</q> etc.
</p>

<p>
Also it is written, Is. xxxii. 17, <q>And the work of <hi rend='smallcaps'>TzDQ</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Tzedeq</hi>, Righteousness (or Justice), shall be peace.</q> Also,
Ps. xix. 10, <q>More to be desired are they than gold, yea, than
much fine gold,</q> etc.
</p>

<p>
But King David saith, <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>, 11, <q>Also by them is thy servant
warned.</q>
</p>

<p>
I affirm concerning myself, that I have been every day
cautious concerning them, so that concerning them I might not
err (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, concerning the judgments, Meshephath, referred to
in verse 9).
</p>

<p>
Excepting a certain day when I was binding together the
Crowns of the King<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, tracing out the
properties, etc., of the Sephiroth which form the King,
Microprosopus, and, as appears from the latter part of this section, those
only in their aspect of Judgment and Wrath.</note> in the Cave of Maranæa, I beheld a
Splendor of devouring Fire flashing from His wrathful
Countenance of Flame, and with terror I trembled at the sight.
</p>

<p>
From that day forth I ever acted with caution in my meditations
concerning them, neither have I omitted that all the days
of my life.
</p>

<p>
Blessed is his portion who is prudent regarding Him who is
more ancient than (otherwise, concerning the gentleness of)
the King, so that he may taste thereof, as is fitting.
</p>

<pb n='359'/><anchor id='Pg359'/>

<p>
Therefore is it written, Ps. xxxiv. 9, <q>Taste and see that
Tetragrammaton is good,</q> etc.
</p>

<p>
Also it is written, Prov. ix. 5, <q>Come, eat of my bread,</q> etc.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XX'/>
<head>Chapter XX: Concerning the Body of Microprosopus</head>

<p>
The masculine power is extended through Däath; and the
Assemblies and Conclaves are filled.
</p>

<p>
It commenceth from the beginning of the skull, and it is extended
throughout the whole body, through the breast, and
through the arms, and through all the other parts.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Chapter XXI'/>
<head>Chapter XXI: Concerning the Bride of Microprosopus</head>

<p>
Unto His back adhereth closely a Ray of most vehement
Splendor, and it flameth forth and formeth a certain skull, concealed
on every side.
</p>

<p>
And thus descendeth the Light of the two brains, and is figured
forth therein.
</p>

<p>
And She (the Bride) adhereth unto the side of the Male;
wherefore also She is called, Cant. v. 2, <q>My dove, my perfect
one.</q> Read not, <q><hi rend='smallcaps'>ThMThI</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Thamathi</hi>,
My perfect one</q>; but <q><hi rend='smallcaps'>ThAVMThI</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Theomathi</hi>, My twin sister,</q> more applicably.
</p>

<p>
The hairs of the Woman contain colors upon colors, as it is
written, Cant. vii. 5, <q>The hair of Thy head like purple.</q>
</p>

<p>
But herewith is Geburah, Severity, connected in the five
Severities (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, which are symbolized in the numerical value,
5, of the letter H final of IHVH, which is the Bride), and the
Woman is extended on Her side, and is applied unto the side
of the Male.
</p>

<p>
Until She is separated from His side, and cometh unto Him
so that She may be conjoined with Him, face to face.
</p>

<p>
And when They are conjoined together, They appear to be
only one body.
</p>

<p>
Hence we learn that the Masculine, taken alone appeareth to
<pb n='360'/><anchor id='Pg360'/>
be only half the body, so that all the mercies are half; and thus
also is it with the Feminine.
</p>

<p>
But when They are joined together, the (two together) appear
to form only one whole body. And it is so.
</p>

<p>
So also here. When the Male is joined with the Female,
They both constitute one complete body, and all the Universe
is in a state of happiness, because all things receive blessing
from Their perfect body. And this is an Arcanum.
</p>

<p>
And therefore it is said, Gen. ii. 3, <q>Tetragrammaton
blessed the seventh day and hallowed it.</q> For then all things
are found (to exist) in the one perfect Body, for <hi rend='smallcaps'>MTRVNIThA</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Matronitha</hi>, the Mother (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,
the Inferior Mother) is joined unto the King, and is found to form the one Body with Him.
</p>

<p>
And therefore are there found to be blessings upon this day.
</p>

<p>
And hence that which is not both Male and Female together
is called half a body. Now, no blessing can rest upon a mutilated
and defective being, but only upon a perfect place and upon
a perfect being, and not at all in an incomplete being.<note place='foot'>This section
is another all-sufficient proof of the teachings maintained
throughout the Qabalah, namely, that Man and Woman are from the creation
coequal and coexistent, perfectly equal one with the other. This fact the translators
of the Bible have been at great pains to conceal by carefully suppressing
every reference to the Feminine portion of the Deity, and by constantly
translating feminine nouns by masculine. And this is the work of so-called
religious men!</note>
</p>

<p>
And a semi-complete being cannot live forever, neither can it
receive blessing forever.
</p>

<p>
The Beauty of the Female is completed by the Beauty of the
Male. And now have we established these facts (concerning
the perfect equality of Male and Female), and they are made
known unto the Companions.
</p>

<p>
With this Woman (the inferior H) are connected all those
things which are below; from Her do they receive their nourishment,
and from Her do they receive blessing; and She is called
the Mother of them all.
</p>

<p>
It is written, Prov. vii. 4, <q>Say unto Chokmah, Thou art my
sister.</q><note place='foot'>Chokmah, Wisdom, the second
Sephirah, is Male in respect of Binah, but Female in respect of Kether. This
is somewhat analogous to the Greek idea of the birth of Athené, Wisdom,
from the brain of Zeus.</note> For there is given one Chokmah (Male), and there
is also given another Chokmah (Female).
</p>

<p>
And this Woman is called the Lesser Chokmah in respect of
the other.
</p>

<pb n='361'/><anchor id='Pg361'/>

<p>
And therefore is it written, Cant. viii. 8, <q>We have a little
sister and she hath no breasts.</q>
</p>

<p>
For in this exile (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, separated from the King) She appeareth
unto us to be <q>our little sister.</q> At first, indeed, she
is small, but she becometh great and greater, until she becometh
the Spouse whom the King taketh unto Himself.
</p>

<p>
As it is written, Cant. viii. 10, <q>I am a wall, and my breasts
are like towers.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And my breasts,</q> etc., since they are full with the nourishment
of all things;<note place='foot'>Compare the symbolism of the many breasts of the
Ephesian Diana.</note> <q>like towers,</q> because they are the great
rivers which flow forth from Aima the Supernal.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='364'/><anchor id='Pg364'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Hebrew Melodies</head>
<head type='sub'>Translated by Mrs. Henry Lucas</head>

<pb n='365'/><anchor id='Pg365'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Ode To Zion</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Art thou not, Zion, fain</l>
<l>To send forth greetings from thy sacred rock</l>
<l>Unto thy captive train,</l>
<l>Who greet thee as the remnants of thy flock?</l>
<l>Take thou on every side&mdash;</l>
<l>East, west, and south, and north&mdash;their greetings multiplied.</l>
<l>Sadly he greets thee still,</l>
<l>The prisoner of hope, who, day and night,</l>
<l>Sheds ceaseless tears, like dew on Hermon's hill&mdash;</l>
<l>Would that they fell upon thy mountain's height!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harsh is my voice when I bewail thy woes,</l>
<l>But when in fancy's dream</l>
<l>I see thy freedom, forth its cadence flows</l>
<l>Sweet as the harps that hung by Babel's stream.</l>
<l>My heart is sore distressed</l>
<l>For Bethel ever blessed,</l>
<l>For Peniel, and each ancient, sacred place.</l>
<l>The holy presence there</l>
<l>To thee is present where</l>
<l>Thy Maker opes thy gates, the gates of heaven to face.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>The glory of the Lord will ever be</l>
<l>Thy sole and perfect light;</l>
<l>No need hast thou, then, to illumine thee,</l>
<l>Of sun by day, or moon and stars by night.</l>
<l>I would that, where God's Spirit was of yore</l>
<l>Poured out unto thy holy ones, I might</l>
<l>There too my soul outpour!</l>
<l>The house of kings and throne of God wert thou,</l>
<l>How comes it then that now</l>
<l>Slaves fill the throne where sat thy kings before?</l>
</lg>

<pb n='366'/><anchor id='Pg366'/>

<lg>
<l>Oh! who will lead me on</l>
<l>To seek the posts where, in far-distant years,</l>
<l>The angels in their glory dawned upon</l>
<l>Thy messengers and seers?</l>
<l>Oh! who will give me wings</l>
<l>That I may fly away,</l>
<l>And there, at rest from all my wanderings,</l>
<l>The ruins of my heart among thy ruins lay?</l>
<l>I'll bend my face unto thy soil, and hold</l>
<l>Thy stones as precious gold.</l>
<l>And when in Hebron I have stood beside</l>
<l>My fathers' tombs, then will I pass in turn</l>
<l>Thy plains and forest wide,</l>
<l>Until I stand on Gilead and discern</l>
<l>Mount Hor and Mount Abarim, 'neath whose crest</l>
<l>Thy luminaries twain, thy guides and beacons rest.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thy air is life unto my soul, thy grains</l>
<l>Of dust are myrrh, thy streams with honey flow;</l>
<l>Naked and barefoot, to thy ruined fanes</l>
<l>How gladly would I go;</l>
<l>To where the ark was treasured, and in dim</l>
<l>Recesses dwelt the holy cherubim.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>I rend the beauty of my locks, and cry</l>
<l>In bitter wrath against the cruel fate</l>
<l>That bids thy holy Nazarites to lie</l>
<l>In earth contaminate.</l>
<l>How can I make or meat or drink my care,</l>
<l>How can mine eyes enjoy</l>
<l>The light of day, when I see ravens tear</l>
<l>Thy eagles' flesh, and dogs thy lions' whelps destroy?</l>
<l>Away! thou cup of sorrow's poisoned gall!</l>
<l>Scarce can my soul thy bitterness sustain.</l>
<l>When I Ahola unto mind recall,</l>
<l>I taste thy venom; and when once again</l>
<l>Upon Aholiba I muse, thy dregs I drain.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perfect in beauty, Zion! how in thee</l>
<l>Do love and grace unite!</l>
<pb n='367'/><anchor id='Pg367'/>
<l>The souls of thy companions tenderly</l>
<l>Turn unto thee; thy joy was their delight,</l>
<l>And, weeping, they lament thy ruin now.</l>
<l>In distant exile, for thy sacred height</l>
<l>They long, and toward thy gates in prayer they bow.</l>
<l>Thy flocks are scattered o'er the barren waste,</l>
<l>Yet do they not forget thy sheltering fold,</l>
<l>Unto thy garments' fringe they cling, and haste</l>
<l>The branches of thy palms to seize and hold.</l>
<l>Shinar and Pathros! come they near to thee?</l>
<l>Naught are they by thy Light and Right divine.</l>
<l>To what can be compared the majesty</l>
<l>Of thy anointed line?</l>
<l>To what the singers, seers, and Levites thine?</l>
<l>The rule of idols fails and is cast down,</l>
<l>Thy power eternal is, from age to age thy crown.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>The Lord desires thee for his dwelling-place</l>
<l>Eternally; and blest</l>
<l>Is he whom God has chosen for the grace</l>
<l>Within thy courts to rest.</l>
<l>Happy is he that watches, drawing near,</l>
<l>Until he sees thy glorious lights arise,</l>
<l>And over whom thy dawn breaks full and clear</l>
<l>Set in the orient skies.</l>
<l>But happiest he, who, with exultant eyes,</l>
<l>The bliss of thy redeemed ones shall behold,</l>
<l>And see thy youth renewed as in the days of old.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Jehuda Halevi.</hi>
</p>
</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>God, Whom Shall I Compare To Thee?</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>God! whom shall I compare to Thee,</l>
<l>When Thou to none canst likened be?</l>
<l>Under what image shall I dare</l>
<l>To picture Thee, when ev'rywhere</l>
<l>All Nature's forms Thine impress bear?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greater, O Lord! Thy glories are</l>
<l>Than all the heavenly chariot far.</l>
<pb n='368'/><anchor id='Pg368'/>
<l>Whose mind can grasp Thy world's design?</l>
<l>Whose word can fitly Thee define?</l>
<l>Whose tongue set forth Thy powers divine?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Can heart approach, can eye behold</l>
<l>Thee in Thy righteousness untold?</l>
<l>Whom didst Thou to Thy counsel call,</l>
<l>When there was none to speak withal</l>
<l>Since Thou wast first and Lord of all?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thy world eternal witness bears</l>
<l>That none its Maker's glory shares.</l>
<l>Thy wisdom is made manifest</l>
<l>In all things formed by Thy behest,</l>
<l>All with Thy seal's clear mark imprest.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Before the pillars of the sky</l>
<l>Were raised, before the mountains high</l>
<l>Were wrought, ere hills and dales were known,</l>
<l>Thou in Thy majesty alone</l>
<l>Didst sit, O God! upon Thy throne!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hearts, seeking Thee, from search refrain,</l>
<l>And weary tongues their praise restrain.</l>
<l>Thyself unbound by time and place,</l>
<l>Thou dost pervade, support, embrace</l>
<l>The world and all created space.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>The sages' minds bewildered grow,</l>
<l>The lightning speed of thought is slow.</l>
<l><q>Awful in praises</q> art Thou named;</l>
<l>Thou fillest, strong in strength proclaimed,</l>
<l>This universe Thy hand has framed.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deep, deep beyond all fathoming,</l>
<l>Far, far beyond all measuring,</l>
<l>We can but seek Thy deeds alone;</l>
<l>When bow Thy saints before Thy throne</l>
<l>Then is Thy faithfulness made known.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thy righteousness we can discern,</l>
<l>Thy holy law proclaim and learn.</l>
<pb n='369'/><anchor id='Pg369'/>
<l>Is not Thy presence near alway</l>
<l>To them who penitently pray,</l>
<l>But far from those who sinning stray?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pure souls behold Thee, and no need</l>
<l>Have they of light: they hear and heed</l>
<l>Thee with the mind's keen ear, although</l>
<l>The ear of flesh be dull and slow.</l>
<l>Their voices answer to and fro.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thy holiness forever they proclaim:</l>
<l>The Lord of Hosts! thrice holy is His name!</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Jehuda Halevi.</hi>
</p>
</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Servant Of God</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Oh! would that I might be</l>
<l>A servant unto Thee,</l>
<l>Thou God by all adored:</l>
<l>Then, though by friends out-cast,</l>
<l>Thy hand would hold me fast,</l>
<l>And draw me near to Thee, my King and Lord!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spirit and flesh are Thine,</l>
<l>O Heavenly Shepherd mine!</l>
<l>My hopes, my thoughts, my fears, Thou seest all,</l>
<l>Thou measurest my path, my steps dost know.</l>
<l>When Thou upholdest, who can make me fall?</l>
<l>When Thou restrainest, who can bid me go?</l>
<l>Oh! would that I might be</l>
<l>A servant unto Thee,</l>
<l>Thou God, by all adored.</l>
<l>Then, though by friends out-cast,</l>
<l>Thy hand would hold me fast,</l>
<l>And draw me near to Thee, my King and Lord!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fain would my heart come nigh</l>
<l>To Thee, O God! on high,</l>
<l>But evil thoughts have led me far astray</l>
<l>From the pure path of righteous government.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='370'/><anchor id='Pg370'/>

<lg>
<l>Guide Thou me back into Thy holy way,</l>
<l>And count me not as one impenitent.</l>
<l>Oh! would that I might be</l>
<l>A servant unto Thee,</l>
<l>Thou God, by all adored.</l>
<l>Then, though by friends out-cast,</l>
<l>Thy hand would hold me fast,</l>
<l>And draw me near to Thee, my King and Lord!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>If in my youth I still</l>
<l>Fail to perform Thy will,</l>
<l>What can I hope when age shall chill my breast?</l>
<l>Heal me, O Lord! with Thee is healing found&mdash;</l>
<l>Cast me not off, by weight of years opprest,</l>
<l>Forsake me not when age my strength has bound.</l>
<l>Oh! would that I might be</l>
<l>A servant unto Thee,</l>
<l>Thou God, by all adored.</l>
<l>Then, though by friends out-cast,</l>
<l>Thy hand would hold me fast,</l>
<l>And draw me near to Thee, my King and Lord!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Contrite and full of dread,</l>
<l>I mourn each moment fled</l>
<l>Midst idle follies roaming desolate;</l>
<l>I sink beneath transgressions manifold,</l>
<l>That from Thy presence keep me separate;</l>
<l>Nor can sin-darkened eyes Thy light behold.</l>
<l>Oh! would that I might be</l>
<l>A servant unto Thee,</l>
<l>Thou God, by all adored.</l>
<l>Then, though by friends out-cast,</l>
<l>Thy hand would hold me fast,</l>
<l>And draw me near to Thee, my King and Lord!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>So lead me that I may</l>
<l>Thy sovereign will obey.</l>
<l>Make pure my heart to seek Thy truth divine;</l>
<l>When burns my wound, be Thou with healing near!</l>
<l>Answer me, Lord! for sore distress is mine,</l>
<l>And say unto Thy servant, I am here!</l>
</lg>

<pb n='371'/><anchor id='Pg371'/>

<lg>
<l>Oh! would that I might be</l>
<l>A servant unto Thee,</l>
<l>Thou God, by all adored!</l>
<l>Then, though by friends out-cast,</l>
<l>Thy hand would hold me fast,</l>
<l>And draw me near to Thee, my King and Lord!</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Jehuda Halevi.</hi>
</p>
</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>My King</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Ere time began, ere age to age had thrilled,</l>
<l>I waited in His storehouse, as He willed;</l>
<l>He gave me being, but, my years fulfilled,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>I shall be summoned back before the King.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>He called the hidden to the light of day,</l>
<l>To right and left, each side the fountain lay,</l>
<l>From out the stream and down the steps, the way</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>That led me to the garden of the King.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thou gavest me a light my path to guide,</l>
<l>To prove my heart's recesses still untried;</l>
<l>And as I went, Thy voice in warning cried:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>Child! fear thou Him Who is Thy God and King!</q></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>True weight and measure learned my heart from Thee;</l>
<l>If blessings follow, then what joy for me!</l>
<l>If naught but sin, all mine the shame must be,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For that was not determined by the King.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>I hasten, trembling, to confess the whole</l>
<l>Of my transgressions, ere I reach the goal</l>
<l>Where mine own words must witness 'gainst my soul,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And who dares doubt the writing of the King?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Erring, I wandered in the wilderness,</l>
<l>In passion's grave nigh sinking powerless:</l>
<l>Now deeply I repent, in sore distress,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>That I kept not the statutes of the King!</l>
</lg>

<pb n='372'/><anchor id='Pg372'/>

<lg>
<l>With worldly longings was my bosom fraught,</l>
<l>Earth's idle toys and follies all I sought;</l>
<l>Ah! when He judges joys so dearly bought,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>How greatly shall I fear my Lord and King!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Now conscience-stricken, humbled to the dust,</l>
<l>Doubting himself, in Thee alone his trust,</l>
<l>He shrinks in terror back, for God is just&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>How can a sinner hope to reach the King?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oh! be Thy mercy in the balance laid,</l>
<l>To hold Thy servant's sins more lightly weighed,</l>
<l>When, his confession penitently made,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>He answers for his guilt before the King.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thine is the love, O God! and Thine the grace,</l>
<l>That folds the sinner in its mild embrace;</l>
<l>Thine the forgiveness bridging o'er the space</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>'Twixt man's works and the task set by the King.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Unheeding all my sins, I cling to Thee!</l>
<l>I know that mercy will Thy footstool be:</l>
<l>Before I call, oh! do Thou answer me,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For nothing dare I claim of Thee, my King!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>O Thou Who makest guilt to disappear,</l>
<l>My help, my hope, my rock, I will not fear;</l>
<l>Though Thou the body hold in dungeon drear,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The soul has found the palace of the King.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Moses b. Nachman</hi>.
</p>
</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>To The Soul</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>O thou, who springest gloriously</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>From thy Creator's fountain blest,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Arise, depart, for this is not thy rest!</l>
<l>The way is long, thou must prepared be,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thy Maker bids thee seek thy goal&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Return then to thy rest, my soul,</l>
<l>For bountifully has God dealt with thee.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='373'/><anchor id='Pg373'/>

<lg>
<l>Behold! I am a stranger here,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>My days like fleeting shadows seem.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>When wilt thou, if not now, thy life redeem?</l>
<l>And when thou seek'st thy Maker have no fear,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For if thou have but purified</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thy heart from stain of sin and pride,</l>
<l>Thy righteous deeds to Him shall draw thee near.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>O thou in strength who treadest, learn</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To know thyself, cast dreams away!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The goal is distant far, and short the day.</l>
<l>What canst thou plead th' Almighty's grace to earn?</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Would thou the glory of the Lord</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Behold, O soul? With prompt accord</l>
<l>Then to thy Father's house return, return!</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Jehuda Halevi.</hi>
</p>
</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sabbath Hymn</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Come forth, my friend, the bride to meet,</l>
<l>Come, O my friend, the Sabbath greet!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Observe ye</q> and <q>remember</q> still</l>
<l>The Sabbath&mdash;thus His holy will</l>
<l>God in one utterance did proclaim.</l>
<l>The Lord is one, and one His name</l>
<l>To His renown and praise and fame.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Come forth, my friend, the bride to meet,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Come, O my friend, the Sabbath greet!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greet we the Sabbath at our door,</l>
<l>Well-spring of blessing evermore,</l>
<l>With everlasting gladness fraught,</l>
<l>Of old ordained, divinely taught,</l>
<l>Last in creation, first in thought.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Come forth, my friend, the bride to meet,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Come, O my friend, the Sabbath greet!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arouse thyself, awake and shine,</l>
<l>For, lo! it comes, the light divine.</l>
<l>Give forth a song, for over thee</l>
<pb n='374'/><anchor id='Pg374'/>
<l>The glory of the Lord shall be</l>
<l>Revealed in beauty speedily.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Come forth, my friend, the bride to meet,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Come, O my friend, the Sabbath greet!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crown of thy husband, come in peace,</l>
<l>Come, bidding toil and trouble cease.</l>
<l>With joy and cheerfulness abide</l>
<l>Among thy people true and tried,</l>
<l>Thy faithful people&mdash;come, O bride!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Come forth, my friend, the bride to meet,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Come, O my friend, the Sabbath greet!</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Shelomo Halevi.</hi>
</p>
</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>O Sleeper! Wake, Arise!</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>O sleeper! wake, arise!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Delusive follies shun,</l>
<l>Keep from the ways of men and raise thine eyes</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To the exalted One.</l>
<l>Hasten as haste the starry orbs of gold</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To serve the Rock of old.</l>
<l>O sleeper! rise and call upon thy God!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Behold the firmament</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His hands have wrought on high,</l>
<l>See how His mighty arms uphold the tent</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Of His ethereal sky,</l>
<l>And mark the host of stars that heaven reveals&mdash;</l>
<l>His graven rings and seals.</l>
<l>Tremble before His majesty and hope</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For His salvation still,</l>
<l>Lest, when for thee the gates of fortune ope,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>False pride thy spirit fill.</l>
<l>O sleeper! rise and call upon thy God!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Go seek at night abroad</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their footsteps, who erewhile</l>
<l>Were saints on earth, whose lips with hymns o'erflowed,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Whose hearts were free from guilt.</l>
<l>Their nights were spent in ceaseless prayer and praise,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In pious fast their days.</l>
<pb n='375'/><anchor id='Pg375'/>
<l>Their souls were paths to God, and by His throne</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their place is set anigh.</l>
<l>Their road through life was but a stepping-stone</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Unto the Lord on high.</l>
<l>O sleeper! rise and call upon thy God!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weep for thy sins, and pause</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In wrongful deeds, to implore</l>
<l>God's pardoning grace, nor fret thyself because</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Of evildoers more.</l>
<l>Cleave to the right, and of thy substance bring</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To honor Him, thy King.</l>
<l>When saviours then Mount Zion joyfully</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ascend with eager feet,</l>
<l>And nations shout for gladness, thou wilt be</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Prepared thy God to meet.</l>
<l>O sleeper! rise and call upon thy God!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whence does man's wisdom flow&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Man, who of dust is wrought,</l>
<l>Whose poor pre-eminence on earth does show</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Over the beast as naught?</l>
<l>Only those gazing with the inward eye</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Behold God's majesty:</l>
<l>They have the well-spring of their being found,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>More precious far than wine.</l>
<l>Thou also thus, though by earth's fetters bound,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mayst find thy Rock divine.</l>
<l>O sleeper! rise and call upon thy God!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>The Lord is Lord of all,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His hands hold life and death,</l>
<l>He bids the lowly rise, the lofty fall,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The world obeys His breath.</l>
<l>Keep judgment, then, and live and cast aside</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>False and rebellious pride,</l>
<l>That asketh when and where, and all below</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And all above would know;</l>
<l>But be thou perfect with the Lord thy God!</l>
<l>O sleeper! rise and call upon thy God!</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Jehuda Halevi.</hi>
</p>
</quote>

</div>

<pb n='376'/><anchor id='Pg376'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Land Of Peace</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Whose works, O Lord, like Thine can be,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Who 'neath Thy throne of grace,</l>
<l>For those pure souls from earth set free,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hast made a dwelling-place?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>There are the sinless spirits bound</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Up in the bond of life,</l>
<l>The weary there new strength have found,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The weak have rest from strife.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sweet peace and calm their spirits bless,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Who reach that heavenly home,</l>
<l>And never-ending pleasantness&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Such is the world to come.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>There glorious visions manifold</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Those happy ones delight,</l>
<l>And in God's presence they behold</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Themselves and Him aright.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>In the King's palace they abide,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And at His table eat,</l>
<l>With kingly dainties satisfied,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Spiritual food most sweet.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>This is the rest forever sure,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>This is the heritage,</l>
<l>Whose goodness and whose bliss endure</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Unchanged from age to age.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>This is the land the spirit knows</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>That everlastingly</l>
<l>With milk and honey overflows&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And such its fruit shall be.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Solomon Ibn Gebirol.</hi>
</p>
</quote>

</div>

<pb n='377'/><anchor id='Pg377'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Heart's Desire</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Lord! unto Thee are ever manifest</l>
<l>My inmost heart's desires, though unexprest</l>
<l>In spoken words. Thy mercy I implore</l>
<l>Even for a moment&mdash;then to die were blest.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oh! if I might but win that grace divine,</l>
<l>Into Thy hand, O Lord, I would resign</l>
<l>My spirit then, and lay me down in peace</l>
<l>To my repose, and sweetest sleep were mine.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Afar from Thee in midst of life I die,</l>
<l>And life in death I find, when Thou art nigh.</l>
<l>Alas! I know not how to seek Thy face,</l>
<l>Nor how to serve and worship Thee, Most High.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oh! lead me in Thy path, and turn again</l>
<l>My heart's captivity, and break in twain</l>
<l>The yoke of folly: teach me to afflict</l>
<l>My soul, the while I yet life's strength retain.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Despise not Thou my lowly penitence,</l>
<l>Ere comes the day, when, deadened every sense,</l>
<l>My limbs too feeble grown to bear my weight,</l>
<l>A burden to myself, I journey hence.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>When to the all-consuming moth a prey,</l>
<l>My wasted form sinks slowly to decay,</l>
<l>And I shall seek the place my fathers sought,</l>
<l>And find my rest there where at rest are they.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>I am on earth a sojourner, a guest,</l>
<l>And my inheritance is in her breast,</l>
<l>My youth has sought as yet its own desires,</l>
<l>When will my soul's true welfare be my quest?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>The world is too much with me, and its din</l>
<l>Prevents my search eternal peace to win.</l>
<l>How can I serve my Maker when my heart</l>
<l>Is passion's captive, is a slave to sin?</l>
</lg>

<pb n='378'/><anchor id='Pg378'/>

<lg>
<l>But should I strive to scale ambition's height,</l>
<l>Who with the worm may sleep ere fall of night?</l>
<l>Or can I joy in happiness to-day</l>
<l>Who know not what may chance by morning's light?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>My days and nights will soon, with restless speed,</l>
<l>Consume life's remnant yet to me decreed;</l>
<l>Then half my body shall the winds disperse,</l>
<l>Half will return to dust, as dust indeed.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>What more can I allege? From youth to age</l>
<l>Passion pursues me still at every stage.</l>
<l>If Thou art not my portion, what is mine?</l>
<l>Lacking Thy favor, what my heritage?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bare of good deeds, scorched by temptation's fire,</l>
<l>Yet to Thy mercy dares my soul aspire;</l>
<l>But wherefore speech prolong, since unto Thee,</l>
<l>O Lord, is manifest my heart's desire?</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Jehuda Halevi.</hi>
</p>
</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>O Soul, With Storms Beset!</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>O soul, with storms beset!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Thy griefs and cares forget.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Why dread earth's transient woe,</l>
<l>When soon thy body in the grave unseen</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Shall be laid low,</l>
<l>And all will be forgotten then, as though</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>It had not been?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Wherefore, my soul, be still!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Adore God's holy will,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Fear death's supreme decree.</l>
<l>Thus mayst thou save thyself, and win high aid</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>To profit thee,</l>
<l>When thou, returning to thy Lord, shalt see</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Thy deeds repaid.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Why muse, O troubled soul,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>O'er life's poor earthly goal?</l>
<pb n='379'/><anchor id='Pg379'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>When thou hast fled, the clay</l>
<l>Lies mute, nor bear'st thou aught of wealth, or might</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>With thee that day,</l>
<l>But, like a bird, unto thy nest away,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Thou wilt take flight.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Why for a land lament</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>In which a lifetime spent</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Is as a hurried breath?</l>
<l>Where splendor turns to gloom, and honors show</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>A faded wreath,</l>
<l>Where health and healing soon must sink beneath</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>The fatal bow?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>What seemeth good and fair</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Is often falsehood there.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Gold melts like shifting sands,</l>
<l>Thy hoarded riches pass to other men</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>And strangers' hands,</l>
<l>And what will all thy treasured wealth and lands</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Avail thee then?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Life is a vine, whose crown</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>The reaper Death cuts down.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>His ever-watchful eyes</l>
<l>Mark every step until night's shadows fall,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>And swiftly flies</l>
<l>The passing day, and ah! how distant lies</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>The goal of all.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Therefore, rebellious soul,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Thy base desires control;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>With scantly given bread</l>
<l>Content thyself, nor let thy memory stray</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>To splendors fled,</l>
<l>But call to mind affliction's weight, and dread</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>The judgment-day.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Prostrate and humbled go,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Like to the dove laid low,</l>
<pb n='380'/><anchor id='Pg380'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Remember evermore</l>
<l>The peace of heaven, the Lord's eternal rest.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>When burdened sore</l>
<l>With sorrow's load, at every step implore</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>His succor blest.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Before God's mercy-seat</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>His pardoning love entreat.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Make pure thy thoughts from sin,</l>
<l>And bring a contrite heart as sacrifice</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>His grace to win&mdash;</l>
<l>Then will His angels come and lead thee in</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>To Paradise.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Solomon Ibn Gebirol.</hi>
</p>
</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sanctification</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>The sixfold wingèd angels cry</l>
<l>To Him, Who hates iniquity:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Holy art Thou, O Lord!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>Holy art Thou!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>The mighty ones of earth do call</l>
<l>To Him, Who has created all:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Blessed art Thou, O Lord!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>Blessed art Thou!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>They, who in radiance shine, proclaim</l>
<l>Of Him, Who wrought them out of flame:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Holy art Thou, O Lord!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>Holy art Thou!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Those doubly tried by flood and fire</l>
<l>United chant in frequent choir:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Blessed art Thou, O Lord!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>Holy and blest!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pure spheres celestial echoing round,</l>
<l>With voice of sweetest song resound:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Holy art Thou, O Lord!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>Holy art Thou!</l>
</lg>

<pb n='381'/><anchor id='Pg381'/>

<lg>
<l>All those redeemèd not by gold,</l>
<l>Repeat in faith and joy untold:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Blessed art Thou, O Lord!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>Blessed art Thou!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>They who pass swiftly to and fro</l>
<l>Make answer, as they come and go:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Holy art Thou, O Lord!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>Holy art Thou!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Who seek His law, and testify</l>
<l>That there is none beside Him, cry:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Blessed art Thou, O Lord!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>Holy and blest!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>The hosts of radiant seraphs call</l>
<l>To Him, most glorious of them all:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Holy art Thou, O Lord!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>Holy art Thou!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>The sons of mighty men declare</l>
<l>His majesty beyond compare:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Blessed art Thou, O Lord!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>Blessed art Thou!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>All they who glorify His name,</l>
<l>With every morn anew proclaim:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Holy art Thou, O Lord!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>Holy art Thou!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Israel, His people, ceaselessly</l>
<l>Cry as they bend and bow the knee:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Blessed art Thou, O Lord!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>Holy and blest.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Those shining as a crystal spring,</l>
<l>Chant in the presence of their King:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Holy art Thou, O Lord!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>Holy art Thou!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>The stranger's children evermore</l>
<l>The mighty Lord of lords adore.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Blessed art Thou, O Lord!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>Blessed art Thou!</l>
</lg>

<pb n='382'/><anchor id='Pg382'/>

<lg>
<l>Those who of fire are fashioned, crowd</l>
<l>On crowd unnumbered, chant aloud:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Holy art Thou, O Lord!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>Holy art Thou!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>They cry, whom He has freed from thrall,</l>
<l>And His inheritance does call:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Blessed art Thou, O Lord!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>Holy and blest.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pure visions, bathed in endless light,</l>
<l>Declare 'midst radiance infinite:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Holy art Thou, O Lord!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>Holy art Thou!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Who to the covenant adhere,</l>
<l>The remnant saved, cry loud and clear:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Blessed art Thou, O Lord!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>Blessed art Thou!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>'Neath folded wings, in cadence meet,</l>
<l>The glorious ones each hour repeat:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Holy art Thou, O Lord!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>Holy art Thou!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>She, who among the nations dwells,</l>
<l>Chosen, apart, His glory tells:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Holy art Thou, O Lord!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>Holy and blest!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>The high exalted ones make known</l>
<l>Of Him, Who fills the heavenly throne:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Holy art Thou, O Lord!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>Holy art Thou!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>They who their God each day proclaim</l>
<l><q>Awful in deeds,</q> exalt His name:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Blessed art Thou, O Lord!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>Blessed art Thou!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Those who are awe-inspiring say</l>
<l>Of Him more awful far than they:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Holy art Thou, O Lord!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>Holy art Thou!</l>
</lg>

<pb n='383'/><anchor id='Pg383'/>

<lg>
<l>To all creation's King of kings,</l>
<l>From earth, from heaven, responsive rings:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Holy art Thou, O Lord!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>Holy and blest!</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Joseph Ibn Abitur.</hi>
</p>
</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Hymn Of Praise</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>O God of earth and heaven,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Spirit and flesh are Thine!</l>
<l>Thou hast in wisdom given</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Man's inward light divine,</l>
<l>And unto him Thy grace accords</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The gift of spoken words.</l>
<l>The world was fashioned by Thy will,</l>
<l>Nor didst Thou toil at it, for still</l>
<l>Thy breath did Thy design fulfil.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>My times are in Thy hand,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thou knowest what is best,</l>
<l>And where I fear to stand</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thy strength brings succor blest.</l>
<l>Thy loving-kindness, as within</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>A mantle, hides my sin.</l>
<l>Thy mercies are my sure defence,</l>
<l>And for Thy bounteous providence</l>
<l>Thou dost demand no recompense.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>For all the sons of men</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thou hast a book prepared,</l>
<l>Where, without hand or pen,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their deeds are all declared:</l>
<l>Yet for the pure in heart shall be</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>A pardon found with Thee.</l>
<l>The life and soul Thou didst create</l>
<l>Thou hast redeemed from evil strait,</l>
<l>Thou hast not left me desolate.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>The heavens Thou badest be,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thy bright, celestial throne,</l>
<pb n='384'/><anchor id='Pg384'/>
<l>Are witnesses to Thee,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>O Thou the Lord alone.</l>
<l>One, indivisible, Thy name</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Upholds creation's frame.</l>
<l>Thou madest all&mdash;the depth, the height,</l>
<l>Thou rulest all in power and might,</l>
<l>Supreme, eternal, infinite!</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Abraham Ibn Ezra.</hi>
</p>
</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Passover Hymn</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>When as a wall the sea</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In heaps uplifted lay,</l>
<l>A new song unto Thee</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sang the redeemed that day.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thou didst in his deceit</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>O'erwhelm the Egyptian's feet,</l>
<l>While Israel's footsteps fleet</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>How beautiful were they!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jeshurun! all who see</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thy glory cry to thee:</l>
<l><q>Who like thy God can be?</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thus even our foes did say.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oh! let thy banner soar</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The scattered remnant o'er,</l>
<l>And gather them once more</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Like corn on harvest-day.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Who bear through all their line</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thy covenant's holy sign,</l>
<l>And to Thy name divine</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Are sanctified alway.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Let all the world behold</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their token, prized of old,</l>
<l>Who on their garment's fold</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The thread of blue display.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='385'/><anchor id='Pg385'/>

<lg>
<l>Be then the truth made known</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For whom, and whom alone,</l>
<l>The twisted fringe is shown,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The covenant kept this day.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oh! let them, sanctified,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Once more with Thee abide,</l>
<l>Their sun shine far and wide,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And chase the clouds away.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>The well-beloved declare</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thy praise in song and prayer:</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>Who can with Thee compare,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>O Lord of Hosts?</q> they say.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>When as a wall the sea</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In heaps uplifted lay,</l>
<l>A new song unto Thee</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sang the redeemed that day.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Jehuda Halevi.</hi>
</p>
</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Morning Prayer</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>O Lord! my life was known to Thee</l>
<l>Ere Thou hadst caused me yet to be,</l>
<l>Thy Spirit ever dwells in me.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Could I, cast down by Thee, have gained</l>
<l>A standing place, or, if restrained</l>
<l>By Thee, go forth with feet unchained?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hear me, Almighty, while I pray,</l>
<l>My thoughts are in Thy hand alway,</l>
<l>Be to my helplessness a stay!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oh! may this hour Thy favor yield,</l>
<l>And may I tread life's battle-field</l>
<l>Encompassed by Thy mercy's shield.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wake me at dawn Thy name to bless,</l>
<l>And in Thy sanctuary's recess</l>
<l>To praise and laud Thy holiness.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Jehuda Halevi.</hi>
</p>
</quote>

</div>

<pb n='386'/><anchor id='Pg386'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Judgment And Mercy</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>By the faithful of His children in their conclaves</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Shall His name be sanctified,</l>
<l>Awe-inspiring are the praises of His angels,</l>
<l>And the voices in His temple spread His glory</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 10'>Far and wide.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Those who keep His law shall yet again be gathered</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To the stronghold of His might,</l>
<l>Those who fear Him commune, praying, with each other&mdash;</l>
<l>He will hear and in the book of their memorial</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 10'>He will write.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Let your deeds be fair and righteous&mdash;then unbroken</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>He the covenant will hold.</l>
<l>He who maketh bright the heavens, He will heed you</l>
<l>And will count your prayers more precious than the off'rings</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 10'>Brought of old.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>May the tribes of those who worship and proclaim Him</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Be uplifted as of yore,</l>
<l>When He pruneth, may He cut the straggling branches,</l>
<l>For to Him belong the sov'reignty and kingdom</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 10'>Evermore.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>May He lead us once again unto the mountain</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Of His sanctuary's shrine,</l>
<l>There to glorify Him ever in His temple,</l>
<l>For our God will not forget His word, the holy</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 10'>And divine.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>At His name shall heaven and earth break forth in praises</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>With a joy that shall not cease,</l>
<l>And the woods shall shout and clap their hands in gladness,</l>
<l>For the Lord our God has visited His people,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 10'>Bringing peace.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>From each band of angels mighty in their splendor,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>From each shining, circling star,</l>
<pb n='387'/><anchor id='Pg387'/>
<l>Hymns and praises evermore declare His glory,</l>
<l>Saying, <q rend='pre'>Praise Him with the sound of joyful trumpets,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 10'><q rend='post'>The Shophar!</q></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>All the creatures of the universe together,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Heaven above and earth below,</l>
<l>Shall proclaim, <q rend='pre'>The Lord in all His works is mighty,</q></l>
<l>He is king o'er all the earth, and His salvation</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 10'><q rend='post'>All shall know.</q></l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Anon.</hi>
</p>
</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Grace After Meals</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Our Rock with loving care,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>According to His word,</l>
<l>Bids all His bounty share,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Then let us bless the Lord.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>His flock our Shepherd feeds</l>
<l>With graciousness divine,</l>
<l>He satisfies our needs</l>
<l>With gifts of bread and wine.</l>
<l>Therefore with one accord</l>
<l>We will His name adore,</l>
<l>Proclaiming evermore</l>
<l>None holy as the Lord.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>Our Rock, etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>The land desired so long,</l>
<l>Our fathers' heritage,</l>
<l>Inspires our grateful song</l>
<l>To God from age to age;</l>
<l>His bounteous gifts afford</l>
<l>Us sustenance each day,</l>
<l>His mercy is our stay,</l>
<l>For faithful is the Lord.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>Our Rock, etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oh! be Thy mercy moved,</l>
<l>Our Rock, to dwell with us,</l>
<pb n='388'/><anchor id='Pg388'/>
<l>With Zion, Thy beloved,</l>
<l>Our temple glorious.</l>
<l>May we, redeemed, restored,</l>
<l>Be led there every one,</l>
<l>By David's holy son,</l>
<l>The anointed of the Lord.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>Our Rock, etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thy city fill once more,</l>
<l>Thy temple-walls upraise,</l>
<l>There will we Thee adore</l>
<l>With joyful songs of praise,</l>
<l>Thee, merciful, adored,</l>
<l>We bless and sanctify,</l>
<l>With wine-cups filled up high,</l>
<l>By blessings of the Lord.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>Our Rock, etc.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Anon.</hi>
</p>
</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Lord Of The Universe</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Lord of the universe, Who reigned</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ere earth and heaven's fashioning,</l>
<l>When to create the world He deigned,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Then was His name proclaimed King.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>And at the end of days shall He,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The Dreaded One, still reign alone,</l>
<l>Who was, Who is, and still will be</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Unchanged upon His glorious throne.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>And He is one, His powers transcend,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Supreme, unfathomed, depth and height,</l>
<l>Without beginning, without end,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His are dominion, power, and might.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>My God and my Redeemer He,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>My rock in sorrow's darkest day,</l>
<l>A help and refuge unto me,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>My cup's full portion, when I pray.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='389'/><anchor id='Pg389'/>

<lg>
<l>My soul into His hand divine</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Do I commend: I will not fear,</l>
<l>My body with it I resign,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>I dread no evil: God is near.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Anon.</hi>
</p>
</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Hymn For The Conclusion Of The
Sabbath</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>May He Who sets the holy and profane</l>
<l>Apart, blot out our sins before His sight,</l>
<l>And make our numbers as the sand again,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And as the stars of night.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>The day declineth like the palm-tree's shade,</l>
<l>I call on God, Who leadeth me aright,</l>
<l>The morning cometh&mdash;thus the watchman said&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Although it now be night.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thy righteousness is like Mount Tabor vast,</l>
<l>Oh! let my sins be wholly put to flight,</l>
<l>Be they as yesterday, forever past,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And as a watch at night.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>The peaceful season of my prayers is o'er,</l>
<l>Would that again had rest my soul contrite,</l>
<l>Weary am I of groaning evermore,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>I melt in tears each night.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hear Thou my voice: be it not vainly sped,</l>
<l>Open to me the gates of lofty height,</l>
<l>For with the evening dew is filled my head,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>My locks with drops of night.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oh! grant me Thy redemption, while I pray,</l>
<l>Be Thou entreated, Lord of power and might,</l>
<l>In twilight, in the evening of the day,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Yea, in the gloom of night.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Save me, O Lord my God! I call on Thee:</l>
<l>Make me to know the path of life aright,</l>
<pb n='390'/><anchor id='Pg390'/>
<l>From sore and wasting sickness snatch Thou me,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Lead me from day to night.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>We are like clay within Thy hand, O Lord!</l>
<l>Forgive us all our sins, both grave and light,</l>
<l>And day shall unto day pour forth the word</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And night declare to night.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>May He Who sets the holy and profane</l>
<l>Apart, blot out our sins before His sight,</l>
<l>And make our numbers as the sand again,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And as the stars of night.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Anon.</hi>
</p>
</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>God And Man</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>O Lord! I will declare</l>
<l>Thy holy name, Thy glories past compare:</l>
<l>My tongue shall not conceal, O Lord!</l>
<l>Thy righteousness made known to me:</l>
<l>I heard and I believed Thy word,</l>
<l>I will not ask presumptuously.</l>
<l>For should the vase of clay</l>
<l><q>What doest thou?</q> unto its maker say?</l>
<l>Him have I sought and known,</l>
<l>A rock of strength, a tower of might,</l>
<l>Resplendent as the glorious light,</l>
<l>Without or veil or covering, radiant shown:</l>
<l>Exalted, magnified,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 10'>Extolled and glorified.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>The heavens from hour to hour</l>
<l>Declare Thy wondrous works, proclaim Thy power</l>
<l>Sunrise and sunset, still the same,</l>
<l>Prostrate in awe eternally.</l>
<l>The angels pass through flood and flame</l>
<l>As unto Thee they testify;</l>
<l>Thy praise they celebrate,</l>
<l>O Thou, the fruit of lips who dost create.</l>
<pb n='391'/><anchor id='Pg391'/>
<l>For Thou uphold'st alone,</l>
<l>Unwearied and invisible,</l>
<l>The depths, the heights, where move and dwell</l>
<l>The living creatures and the heavenly throne:</l>
<l>Exalted, magnified,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 10'>Extolled and glorified.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Who has the glory praised</l>
<l>Fitly of Him, Whose word the heavens upraised?</l>
<l>The Eternal One, Who dwells concealed</l>
<l>In His exalted heights, but yet</l>
<l>In Zion's temple, full revealed,</l>
<l>Did erst His glorious presence set,</l>
<l>And He showed visions then</l>
<l>To cause His image to be seen of men;</l>
<l>Yet past all measuring</l>
<l>His wisdom is, past depth and height</l>
<l>He flashes on His prophet's sight</l>
<l>In visions only as the heavenly king:</l>
<l>Exalted, magnified,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 10'>Extolled and glorified.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>His power, exceeding great,</l>
<l>Is without end: who can His praise narrate?</l>
<l>Happy the man, who testifies</l>
<l>Unto His greatness manifold,</l>
<l>Whose faith in God unshaken lies,</l>
<l>In God, whose arms the world uphold,</l>
<l>Who, fearing God, can trust</l>
<l>In Him, acknowledging His deeds are just,</l>
<l>That for himself has He</l>
<l>Made all His works, His creatures all,</l>
<l>And that His awful day will call</l>
<l>All men, the judgment of their deeds to see:</l>
<l>Exalted, magnified,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 10'>Extolled and glorified.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Do thou then heed and learn,</l>
<l>Prepare thyself thy nature to discern.</l>
<l>See whence thou comest, what thou art,</l>
<l>And who created thee and taught</l>
<pb n='392'/><anchor id='Pg392'/>
<l>Thee knowledge, and in every part</l>
<l>Of thee the power of motion wrought.</l>
<l>Mark then God's might untold,</l>
<l>And rouse thyself His wonders to behold.</l>
<l>But to Himself concealed</l>
<l>Dare not to stretch thy hand, for then</l>
<l>Thou seekest, with presumptuous ken,</l>
<l>The first and last, the hidden and revealed:</l>
<l>Exalted, magnified,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 10'>Extolled and glorified.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Jehuda Halevi.</hi>
</p>
</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Hymn For Tabernacles</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Thy praise, O Lord! will I proclaim</l>
<l>In hymns unto Thy glorious name.</l>
<l>O thou Redeemer, Lord and King,</l>
<l>Redemption to Thy faithful bring!</l>
<l>Before Thine altar they rejoice</l>
<l>With branch of palm and myrtle stem,</l>
<l>To Thee they raise the prayful voice&mdash;</l>
<l>Have mercy, save and prosper them.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mayst Thou, in mercy manifold,</l>
<l>Dear unto Thee Thy people hold,</l>
<l>When at Thy gate they bend the knee,</l>
<l>And worship and acknowledge Thee.</l>
<l>Do Thou their heart's desire fulfil,</l>
<l>Rejoice with them in love this day,</l>
<l>Forgive their sins and thoughts of ill,</l>
<l>And their transgressions cast away.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>They overflow with prayer and praise</l>
<l>To Him, Who knows the future days.</l>
<l>Have mercy Thou, and hear the prayer</l>
<l>Of those who palms and myrtles bear.</l>
<l>Thee day and night they sanctify,</l>
<l>And in perpetual song adore;</l>
<l>Like to the heavenly hosts they cry:</l>
<l><q>Blessed art Thou for evermore.</q></l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Eleazar B. Jacob Kalir.</hi>
</p>
</quote>

</div>

<pb n='393'/><anchor id='Pg393'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Hymn For Pentecost</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>When Thou didst descend upon Sinai's mountain,</l>
<l>It trembled and shook 'neath Thy mighty hand,</l>
<l>And the rocks were moved by Thy power and splendor;</l>
<l>How then can my spirit before Thee stand</l>
<l>On the day when darkness o'erspread the heavens,</l>
<l>And the sun was hidden at Thy command?</l>
<l>The angels of God for Thy great name's worship,</l>
<l>Are ranged before Thee, a shining band,</l>
<l>And the children of men are waiting ever</l>
<l>Thy mercies unnumbered as grains of sand;</l>
<l>The law they received from the mouth of Thy glory,</l>
<l>They learn and consider and understand.</l>
<l>Oh! accept Thou their song and rejoice in their gladness,</l>
<l>Who proclaim Thy glory in every land.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Jehuda Halevi.</hi>
</p>
</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Hymn Of Glory</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Sweet hymns and songs will I indite</l>
<l>To sing of Thee by day and night,</l>
<l>Of Thee, Who art my soul's delight.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>How doth my soul within me yearn</l>
<l>Beneath Thy shadow to return,</l>
<l>Thy secret mysteries to learn.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>And even while yet Thy glory fires</l>
<l>My words, and hymns of praise inspires,</l>
<l>Thy love it is my heart desires.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Therefore I will of Thee relate</l>
<l>All glorious things, and celebrate</l>
<l>In songs of love Thy name most great.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thy glory shall my discourse be,</l>
<l>In images I picture Thee,</l>
<l>Although Thyself I cannot see.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='394'/><anchor id='Pg394'/>

<lg>
<l>In mystic utterances alone,</l>
<l>By prophet and by seer made known,</l>
<l>Hast Thou Thy radiant glory shown.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thy might and greatness they portrayed,</l>
<l>According to the power displayed</l>
<l>In all the works Thy hand has made.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>In images of Thee they told</l>
<l>Of Thy great wonders wrought of old,</l>
<l>Thy essence they could not behold.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>In signs and visions seen of yore</l>
<l>They pictured Thee in ancient lore,</l>
<l>But Thou art One for evermore.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>They saw in Thee both youth and age,</l>
<l>The man of war, the hoary sage,</l>
<l>But ever Israel's heritage.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>O Thou Whose word is truth alway</l>
<l>Thy people seek Thy face this day,</l>
<l>Oh! be Thou near them when they pray.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>May these, my songs and musings, be</l>
<l>Acceptable, O Lord, to Thee,</l>
<l>And do Thou hear them graciously.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oh! let my praises, heavenward sped,</l>
<l>Be as a crown unto Thy head,</l>
<l>My prayer as incense offered.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oh! may my words of blessing rise</l>
<l>To Thee, Who, throned above the skies,</l>
<l>Art just and mighty, great and wise.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>And when Thy glory I declare,</l>
<l>Do Thou incline Thee to my prayer,</l>
<l>As though sweet spice my offering were.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>My meditation day and night</l>
<l>May it be pleasant in Thy sight,</l>
<l>For Thou art all my soul's delight.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

</div>

<pb n='395'/><anchor id='Pg395'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Hymn Of Unity For The Seven Days Of The
Week<note place='foot'>The original of the <q>Hymn of
Unity</q> is in seven very long parts. These short ones merely give the leading
idea in each of the original parts.</note></head>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
I
</p>

<lg>
<l>Eternal King, the heavens and earth are Thine,</l>
<l>Thine are the seas and every living thing.</l>
<l>Thy hand upholds creation's vast design,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 10'>Eternal King!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>The mighty waters with Thy glory ring,</l>
<l>Unnumbered lands to chant Thy praise combine,</l>
<l>And Kings of earth to Thee their worship bring.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thy people Israel, for Thy love benign,</l>
<l>Blesses Thy name and joys Thy praise to sing.</l>
<l>Thou art the God of truth, the one, divine,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 10'>Eternal King!</l>
</lg>

<p>
II
</p>

<lg>
<l>I worship Thee for all Thy boundless store</l>
<l>Of righteousness and mercy shown to me,</l>
<l>And for Thy holy book of sacred lore</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 10'>I worship Thee.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>To Thee alone our fathers bent the knee,</l>
<l>And Thee alone do we this day adore,</l>
<l>Bearing our witness to Thy unity.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thou art our God, Thy favor we implore,</l>
<l>Thou art our shepherd, and Thy flock are we.</l>
<l>Therefore I bless Thy name and evermore</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 10'>I worship Thee.</l>
</lg>

<p>
III
</p>

<lg>
<l>I know it well: Thou art all-good, all-wise.</l>
<l>Thou slayest, but Thy touch death's power can quell;</l>
<l>Thou woundest, but Thy hand the balm supplies:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 10'>I know it well.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='396'/><anchor id='Pg396'/>

<lg>
<l>Nor sin nor grief can in Thy presence dwell,</l>
<l>Slumber and sleep come not unto Thine eyes,</l>
<l>Great God, eternal and unchangeable!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>The soul of all mankind before Thee lies;</l>
<l>Thou searchest all their hearts, their thoughts canst tell;</l>
<l>Thou hearest graciously their prayerful cries:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 10'>I know it well.</l>
</lg>

<p>
IV
</p>

<lg>
<l>We will extol the Lord of lords, whose name</l>
<l>Is evermore and everywhere adored.</l>
<l>In songs and hymns our lips His praise shall frame,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 10'>We will extol the Lord!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>He is the hope of Israel, His word</l>
<l>A lamp unto our feet, a guiding flame</l>
<l>To those who trust in Him with full accord.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>He is through countless ages still the same,</l>
<l>The shield of our salvation and our sword,</l>
<l>And generations, each to each, proclaim:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 10'>We will extol the Lord!</l>
</lg>

<p>
V
</p>

<lg>
<l>Who shall narrate Thy wonders wrought of old?</l>
<l>The utterance of the lips Thou didst create,</l>
<l>But all Thy majesty and power untold</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 10'>Who shall narrate?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thy ways on earth in song we celebrate.</l>
<l>Though none may Thy similitude behold,</l>
<l>Yet know we by Thy works that Thou are great.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thousands of angels, by Thy word controlled,</l>
<l>To do Thy bidding Thy commands await:</l>
<l>Yet of them all, Thy wonders manifold</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 10'>Who shall narrate?</l>
</lg>

<pb n='397'/><anchor id='Pg397'/>

<p>
VI
</p>

<lg>
<l>Alone didst Thou, O Lord, the heaven's wide tent</l>
<l>Uprear, and bid the earth beneath be shown;</l>
<l>Thy word the oceans in their boundaries pent</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 10'>Alone.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>No aid or counsel hadst Thou save Thine own</l>
<l>When Thou with lights didst hang the firmament</l>
<l>And call the hosts celestial round Thy throne.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thy works, in universal cadence blent,</l>
<l>Give praise to Thee, and make Thy glory known.</l>
<l>Thou madest all, great God beneficent,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 10'>Alone!</l>
</lg>

<p>
VII
</p>

<lg>
<l>Of old Thou didst the Sabbath bless and praise,</l>
<l>Because thereon Thou didst Thy work behold</l>
<l>Completed in the sun's new-kindled rays</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 10'>Of old.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bless Thou, this day, with mercies manifold</l>
<l>Thy people, that in love and awe obeys</l>
<l>Thy word, and chants Thy righteousness untold.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lord, we desire to do Thy will always!</l>
<l>Make pure our hearts like thrice-refinèd gold,</l>
<l>And these, our prayers, accept as in the days</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 10'>Of old.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Anon.</hi>
</p>
</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Penitential Prayer</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Forth flies my soul, upborne by hope untiring,</l>
<l>The land of rest, the spring of life desiring,</l>
<l>Unto the heavenly dwelling-place aspiring,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To seek its peace by day and night.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>My spirit does God's majesty adore,</l>
<l>And without wings shall to His presence soar,</l>
<l>There to behold His glory evermore,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>At dawn, at noonday, and at night.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='398'/><anchor id='Pg398'/>

<lg>
<l>On all His works mine eye in wonder gazes,</l>
<l>And heavenward an eager look upraises;</l>
<l>Day unto day proclaims its Maker's praises,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And night declares them unto night.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thy loving-kindness is my lifelong guide,</l>
<l>But often from Thy path I've turned aside.</l>
<l>O Lord, how hast Thou searched my heart and tried</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>My inmost thoughts at dead of night!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sleepless upon my bed the hours I number,</l>
<l>And, rising, seek the house of God, while slumber</l>
<l>Lies heavy on men's eyes, and dreams encumber</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their souls in visions of the night.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>In sin and folly passed my early years,</l>
<l>Wherefore I am ashamed, and life's arrears</l>
<l>Now strive to pay, the while my bitter tears</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Have been my food by day and night.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pent in the body's cage, pure child of heaven,</l>
<l>Bethink thee, life but as a bridge is given.</l>
<l>Awake, arise, to praise God gladly, even</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In the first hours of the night.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haste then, pure heart, to break sin's deadly sway,</l>
<l>And seek the path of righteousness alway;</l>
<l>For all our years are but as yesterday&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Soon past, and as a watch at night.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Short is man's life, and full of care and sorrow,</l>
<l>This way and that he turns some ease to borrow,</l>
<l>Like to a flower he blooms, and on the morrow</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Is gone&mdash;a vision of the night.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>How does the weight of sin my soul oppress!</l>
<l>Because God's law too often I transgress;</l>
<l>I mourn and sigh: with tears of bitterness</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>My bed I water all the night.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>I rise at dawn and still the salt stream flows,</l>
<l>My heart's blood would I shed to find repose;</l>
<pb n='399'/><anchor id='Pg399'/>
<l>But when my soul is downcast with my woes,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>I will recall my prayer at night.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>My youth wanes like a shadow that is cast,</l>
<l>Swifter than eagles' wings my years fly fast,</l>
<l>And I remember not my gladness past,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Either by day or yet by night.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Proclaim we then a fast, a holy day,</l>
<l>Make pure our hearts from sin, God's will obey,</l>
<l>And unto Him, with humble spirits, pray</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Unceasingly, by day and night.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>May we yet hear His words: <q rend='pre'>Thou art my own,</q></l>
<l>My grace is thine, the shelter of My throne,</l>
<l>For I am thy Redeemer, I alone!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>Endure but patiently this night.</q></l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Moses Ibn Ezra.</hi>
</p>
</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Living God We Praise</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>The living God we praise, exalt, adore!</l>
<l>He was, He is, He will be evermore.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>No unity like unto His can be,</l>
<l>Eternal, inconceivable, is He.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>No form or shape has th' Incorporeal One,</l>
<l>Most holy beyond all comparison.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>He was, ere aught was made in heaven or earth,</l>
<l>But His existence has no date or birth.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lord of the Universe is He proclaimed,</l>
<l>Teaching His power to all His hand has framed.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>He gave His gift of prophecy to those</l>
<l>In whom He gloried, whom He loved and chose.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>No prophet ever yet has filled the place</l>
<l>Of Moses, who beheld God face to face.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='400'/><anchor id='Pg400'/>

<lg>
<l>Through him (the faithful in his house) the Lord</l>
<l>The law of truth to Israel did accord.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>This law God will not alter, will not change</l>
<l>For any other through time's utmost range.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>He knows and heeds the secret thoughts of man,</l>
<l>He saw the end of all ere aught began.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>With love and grace doth He the righteous bless,</l>
<l>He metes out evil unto wickedness.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>He at the last will His anointed send,</l>
<l>Those to redeem, who hope and wait the end.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>God will the dead to life again restore,</l>
<l>Praised be His glorious name for evermore.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Anon.</hi>
</p>
</quote>
</div>
</div>
</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
